adventure, as might be seen by the smiles which from time to time passed
over his countenance, whose thoughtfulness they animated.




31 ENGLISH AND FRENCH


The hour having come, they went with their four lackeys to a spot behind
the Luxembourg given up to the feeding of goats. Athos threw a piece of
money to the goatkeeper to withdraw. The lackeys were ordered to act as
sentinels.

A silent party soon drew near to the same enclosure, entered, and joined
the Musketeers. Then, according to foreign custom, the presentations
took place.

The Englishmen were all men of rank; consequently the odd names of their
adversaries were for them not only a matter of surprise, but of
annoyance.

“But after all,” said Lord de Winter, when the three friends had been
named, “we do not know who you are. We cannot fight with such names;
they are names of shepherds.”

“Therefore your lordship may suppose they are only assumed names,” said
Athos.

“Which only gives us a greater desire to know the real ones,” replied
the Englishman.

“You played very willingly with us without knowing our names,” said
Athos, “by the same token that you won our horses.”

“That is true, but we then only risked our pistoles; this time we risk
our blood. One plays with anybody; but one fights only with equals.”

“And that is but just,” said Athos, and he took aside the one of the
four Englishmen with whom he was to fight, and communicated his name in
a low voice.

Porthos and Aramis did the same.

“Does that satisfy you?” said Athos to his adversary. “Do you find me of
sufficient rank to do me the honor of crossing swords with me?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said the Englishman, bowing.

“Well! now shall I tell you something?” added Athos, coolly.

“What?” replied the Englishman.

“Why, that is that you would have acted much more wisely if you had not
required me to make myself known.”

“Why so?”

“Because I am believed to be dead, and have reasons for wishing nobody
to know I am living; so that I shall be obliged to kill you to prevent
my secret from roaming over the fields.”

The Englishman looked at Athos, believing that he jested, but Athos did
not jest the least in the world.

“Gentlemen,” said Athos, addressing at the same time his companions and
their adversaries, “are we ready?”

“Yes!” answered the Englishmen and the Frenchmen, as with one voice.

“On guard, then!” cried Athos.

Immediately eight swords glittered in the rays of the setting sun, and
the combat began with an animosity very natural between men twice
enemies.

Athos fenced with as much calmness and method as if he had been
practicing in a fencing school.

Porthos, abated, no doubt, of his too-great confidence by his adventure
of Chantilly, played with skill and prudence. Aramis, who had the third
canto of his poem to finish, behaved like a man in haste.

Athos killed his adversary first. He hit him but once, but as he had
foretold, that hit was a mortal one; the sword pierced his heart.

Second, Porthos stretched his upon the grass with a wound through his
thigh, As the Englishman, without making any further resistance, then
surrendered his sword, Porthos took him up in his arms and bore him to
his carriage.

Aramis pushed his so vigorously that after going back fifty paces, the
man ended by fairly taking to his heels, and disappeared amid the
hooting of the lackeys.

As to d’Artagnan, he fought purely and simply on the defensive; and when
he saw his adversary pretty well fatigued, with a vigorous side thrust
sent his sword flying. The baron, finding himself disarmed, took two or
three steps back, but in this movement his foot slipped and he fell
backward.

D’Artagnan was over him at a bound, and said to the Englishman, pointing
his sword to his throat, “I could kill you, my Lord, you are completely
in my hands; but I spare your life for the sake of your sister.”

D’Artagnan was at the height of joy; he had realized the plan he had
imagined beforehand, whose picturing had produced the smiles we noted
upon his face.

The Englishman, delighted at having to do with a gentleman of such a
kind disposition, pressed d’Artagnan in his arms, and paid a thousand
compliments to the three Musketeers, and as Porthos’s adversary was
already installed in the carriage, and as Aramis’s had taken to his
heels, they had nothing to think about but the dead.

As Porthos and Aramis were undressing him, in the hope of finding his
wound not mortal, a large purse dropped from his clothes. D’Artagnan
picked it up and offered it to Lord de Winter.

“What the devil would you have me do with that?” said the Englishman.

“You can restore it to his family,” said d’Artagnan.

“His family will care much about such a trifle as that! His family will
inherit fifteen thousand louis a year from him. Keep the purse for your
lackeys.”

D’Artagnan put the purse into his pocket.

“And now, my young friend, for you will permit me, I hope, to give you
that name,” said Lord de Winter, “on this very evening, if agreeable to
you, I will present you to my sister, Milady Clarik, for I am desirous
that she should take you into her good graces; and as she is not in bad
odor at court, she may perhaps on some future day speak a word that will
not prove useless to you.”

D’Artagnan blushed with pleasure, and bowed a sign of assent.

At this time Athos came up to d’Artagnan.

“What do you mean to do with that purse?” whispered he.

“Why, I meant to pass it over to you, my dear Athos.”

“Me! why to me?”

“Why, you killed him! They are the spoils of victory.”

“I, the heir of an enemy!” said Athos; “for whom, then, do you take me?”

“It is the custom in war,” said d’Artagnan, “why should it not be the
custom in a duel?”

“Even on the field of battle, I have never done that.”

Porthos shrugged his shoulders; Aramis by a movement of his lips
endorsed Athos.

“Then,” said d’Artagnan, “let us give the money to the lackeys, as Lord
de Winter desired us to do.”

“Yes,” said Athos; “let us give the money to the lackeys--not to our
lackeys, but to the lackeys of the Englishmen.”

Athos took the purse, and threw it into the hand of the coachman. “For
you and your comrades.”

This greatness of spirit in a man who was quite destitute struck even
Porthos; and this French generosity, repeated by Lord de Winter and his
friend, was highly applauded, except by MM Grimaud, Bazin, Mousqueton
and Planchet.

Lord de Winter, on quitting d’Artagnan, gave him his sister’s address.
She lived in the Place Royale--then the fashionable quarter--at Number
6, and he undertook to call and take d’Artagnan with him in order to
introduce him. D’Artagnan appointed eight o’clock at Athos’s residence.

This introduction to Milady Clarik occupied the head of our Gascon
greatly. He remembered in what a strange manner this woman had hitherto
been mixed up in his destiny. According to his conviction, she was some
creature of the cardinal, and yet he felt himself invincibly drawn
toward her by one of those sentiments for which we cannot account. His
only fear was that Milady would recognize in him the man of Meung and of
Dover. Then she knew that he was one of the friends of M. de Treville,
and consequently, that he belonged body and soul to the king; which
would make him lose a part of his advantage, since when known to Milady
as he knew her, he played only an equal game with her. As to the
commencement of an intrigue between her and M. de Wardes, our
presumptuous hero gave but little heed to that, although the marquis was
young, handsome, rich, and high in the cardinal’s favor. It is not for
nothing we are but twenty years old, above all if we were born at
Tarbes.

D’Artagnan began by making his most splendid toilet, then returned to
Athos’s, and according to custom, related everything to him. Athos
listened to his projects, then shook his head, and recommended prudence
to him with a shade of bitterness.

“What!” said he, “you have just lost one woman, whom you call good,
charming, perfect; and here you are, running headlong after another.”

D’Artagnan felt the truth of this reproach.

“I loved Madame Bonacieux with my heart, while I only love Milady with
my head,” said he. “In getting introduced to her, my principal object is
to ascertain what part she plays at court.”

“The part she plays, PARDIEU! It is not difficult to divine that, after
all you have told me. She is some emissary of the cardinal; a woman who
will draw you into a snare in which you will leave your head.”

“The devil! my dear Athos, you view things on the dark side, methinks.”

“My dear fellow, I mistrust women. Can it be otherwise? I bought my
experience dearly--particularly fair women. Milady is fair, you say?”

“She has the most beautiful light hair imaginable!”

“Ah, my poor d’Artagnan!” said Athos.

“Listen to me! I want to be enlightened on a subject; then, when I shall
have learned what I desire to know, I will withdraw.”

“Be enlightened!” said Athos, phlegmatically.

Lord de Winter arrived at the appointed time; but Athos, being warned of
his coming, went into the other chamber. He therefore found d’Artagnan
alone, and as it was nearly eight o’clock he took the young man with
him.

An elegant carriage waited below, and as it was drawn by two excellent
horses, they were soon at the Place Royale.

Milady Clarik received d’Artagnan ceremoniously. Her hotel was
remarkably sumptuous, and while the most part of the English had quit,
or were about to quit, France on account of the war, Milady had just
been laying out much money upon her residence; which proved that the
general measure which drove the English from France did not affect her.

“You see,” said Lord de Winter, presenting d’Artagnan to his sister, “a
young gentleman who has held my life in his hands, and who has not
abused his advantage, although we have been twice enemies, although it
was I who insulted him, and although I am an Englishman. Thank him,
then, madame, if you have any affection for me.”

Milady frowned slightly; a scarcely visible cloud passed over her brow,
and so peculiar a smile appeared upon her lips that the young man, who
saw and observed this triple shade, almost shuddered at it.

The brother did not perceive this; he had turned round to play with
Milady’s favorite monkey, which had pulled him by the doublet.

“You are welcome, monsieur,” said Milady, in a voice whose singular
sweetness contrasted with the symptoms of ill-humor which d’Artagnan had
just remarked; “you have today acquired eternal rights to my gratitude.”

The Englishman then turned round and described the combat without
omitting a single detail. Milady listened with the greatest attention,
and yet it was easily to be perceived, whatever effort she made to
conceal her impressions, that this recital was not agreeable to her. The
blood rose to her head, and her little foot worked with impatience
beneath her robe.

Lord de Winter perceived nothing of this. When he had finished, he went
to a table upon which was a salver with Spanish wine and glasses. He
filled two glasses, and by a sign invited d’Artagnan to drink.

D’Artagnan knew it was considered disobliging by an Englishman to refuse
to pledge him. He therefore drew near to the table and took the second
glass. He did not, however, lose sight of Milady, and in a mirror he
perceived the change that came over her face. Now that she believed
herself to be no longer observed, a sentiment resembling ferocity
animated her countenance. She bit her handkerchief with her beautiful
teeth.

That pretty little SOUBRETTE whom d’Artagnan had already observed then
came in. She spoke some words to Lord de Winter in English, who
thereupon requested d’Artagnan’s permission to retire, excusing himself
on account of the urgency of the business that had called him away, and
charging his sister to obtain his pardon.

D’Artagnan exchanged a shake of the hand with Lord de Winter, and then
returned to Milady. Her countenance, with surprising mobility, had
recovered its gracious expression; but some little red spots on her
handkerchief indicated that she had bitten her lips till the blood came.
Those lips were magnificent; they might be said to be of coral.

The conversation took a cheerful turn. Milady appeared to have entirely
recovered. She told d’Artagnan that Lord de Winter was her
brother-in-law, and not her brother. She had married a younger brother
of the family, who had left her a widow with one child. This child was
the only heir to Lord de Winter, if Lord de Winter did not marry. All
this showed d’Artagnan that there was a veil which concealed something;
but he could not yet see under this veil.

In addition to this, after a half hour’s conversation d’Artagnan was
convinced that Milady was his compatriot; she spoke French with an
elegance and a purity that left no doubt on that head.

D’Artagnan was profuse in gallant speeches and protestations of
devotion. To all the simple things which escaped our Gascon, Milady
replied with a smile of kindness. The hour came for him to retire.
D’Artagnan took leave of Milady, and left the saloon the happiest of
men.

On the staircase he met the pretty SOUBRETTE, who brushed gently against
him as she passed, and then, blushing to the eyes, asked his pardon for
having touched him in a voice so sweet that the pardon was granted
instantly.

D’Artagnan came again on the morrow, and was still better received than
on the evening before. Lord de Winter was not at home; and it was Milady
who this time did all the honors of the evening. She appeared to take a
great interest in him, asked him whence he came, who were his friends,
and whether he had not sometimes thought of attaching himself to the
cardinal.

D’Artagnan, who, as we have said, was exceedingly prudent for a young
man of twenty, then remembered his suspicions regarding Milady. He
launched into a eulogy of his Eminence, and said that he should not have
failed to enter into the Guards of the cardinal instead of the king’s
Guards if he had happened to know M. de Cavois instead of M. de
Treville.

Milady changed the conversation without any appearance of affectation,
and asked d’Artagnan in the most careless manner possible if he had ever
been in England.

D’Artagnan replied that he had been sent thither by M. de Treville to
treat for a supply of horses, and that he had brought back four as
specimens.

Milady in the course of the conversation twice or thrice bit her lips;
she had to deal with a Gascon who played close.

At the same hour as on the preceding evening, d’Artagnan retired. In the
corridor he again met the pretty Kitty; that was the name of the
SOUBRETTE. She looked at him with an expression of kindness which it was
impossible to mistake; but d’Artagnan was so preoccupied by the mistress
that he noticed absolutely nothing but her.

D’Artagnan came again on the morrow and the day after that, and each day
Milady gave him a more gracious reception.

Every evening, either in the antechamber, the corridor, or on the
stairs, he met the pretty SOUBRETTE. But, as we have said, d’Artagnan
paid no attention to this persistence of poor Kitty.




32 A PROCURATOR’S DINNER


However brilliant had been the part played by Porthos in the duel, it
had not made him forget the dinner of the procurator’s wife.

On the morrow he received the last touches of Mousqueton’s brush for an
hour, and took his way toward the Rue aux Ours with the steps of a man
who was doubly in favor with fortune.

His heart beat, but not like d’Artagnan’s with a young and impatient
love. No; a more material interest stirred his blood. He was about at
last to pass that mysterious threshold, to climb those unknown stairs by
which, one by one, the old crowns of M. Coquenard had ascended. He was
about to see in reality a certain coffer of which he had twenty times
beheld the image in his dreams--a coffer long and deep, locked, bolted,
fastened in the wall; a coffer of which he had so often heard, and which
the hands--a little wrinkled, it is true, but still not without
elegance--of the procurator’s wife were about to open to his admiring
looks.

And then he--a wanderer on the earth, a man without fortune, a man
without family, a soldier accustomed to inns, cabarets, taverns, and
restaurants, a lover of wine forced to depend upon chance treats--was
about to partake of family meals, to enjoy the pleasures of a
comfortable establishment, and to give himself up to those little
attentions which “the harder one is, the more they please,” as old
soldiers say.

To come in the capacity of a cousin, and seat himself every day at a
good table; to smooth the yellow, wrinkled brow of the old procurator;
to pluck the clerks a little by teaching them BASSETTE, PASSE-DIX, and
LANSQUENET, in their utmost nicety, and winning from them, by way of fee
for the lesson he would give them in an hour, their savings of a
month--all this was enormously delightful to Porthos.

The Musketeer could not forget the evil reports which then prevailed,
and which indeed have survived them, of the procurators of the
period--meanness, stinginess, fasts; but as, after all, excepting some
few acts of economy which Porthos had always found very unseasonable,
the procurator’s wife had been tolerably liberal--that is, be it
understood, for a procurator’s wife--he hoped to see a household of a
highly comfortable kind.

And yet, at the very door the Musketeer began to entertain some doubts.
The approach was not such as to prepossess people--an ill-smelling, dark
passage, a staircase half-lighted by bars through which stole a glimmer
from a neighboring yard; on the first floor a low door studded with
enormous nails, like the principal gate of the Grand Chatelet.

Porthos knocked with his hand. A tall, pale clerk, his face shaded by a
forest of virgin hair, opened the door, and bowed with the air of a man
forced at once to respect in another lofty stature, which indicated
strength, the military dress, which indicated rank, and a ruddy
countenance, which indicated familiarity with good living.

A shorter clerk came behind the first, a taller clerk behind the second,
a stripling of a dozen years rising behind the third. In all, three
clerks and a half, which, for the time, argued a very extensive
clientage.

Although the Musketeer was not expected before one o’clock, the
procurator’s wife had been on the watch ever since midday, reckoning
that the heart, or perhaps the stomach, of her lover would bring him
before his time.

Mme. Coquenard therefore entered the office from the house at the same
moment her guest entered from the stairs, and the appearance of the
worthy lady relieved him from an awkward embarrassment. The clerks
surveyed him with great curiosity, and he, not knowing well what to say
to this ascending and descending scale, remained tongue-tied.

“It is my cousin!” cried the procurator’s wife. “Come in, come in,
Monsieur Porthos!”

The name of Porthos produced its effect upon the clerks, who began to
laugh; but Porthos turned sharply round, and every countenance quickly
recovered its gravity.

They reached the office of the procurator after having passed through
the antechamber in which the clerks were, and the study in which they
ought to have been. This last apartment was a sort of dark room,
littered with papers. On quitting the study they left the kitchen on the
right, and entered the reception room.

All these rooms, which communicated with one another, did not inspire
Porthos favorably. Words might be heard at a distance through all these
open doors. Then, while passing, he had cast a rapid, investigating
glance into the kitchen; and he was obliged to confess to himself, to
the shame of the procurator’s wife and his own regret, that he did not
see that fire, that animation, that bustle, which when a good repast is
on foot prevails generally in that sanctuary of good living.

The procurator had without doubt been warned of his visit, as he
expressed no surprise at the sight of Porthos, who advanced toward him
with a sufficiently easy air, and saluted him courteously.

“We are cousins, it appears, Monsieur Porthos?” said the procurator,
rising, yet supporting his weight upon the arms of his cane chair.

The old man, wrapped in a large black doublet, in which the whole of his
slender body was concealed, was brisk and dry. His little gray eyes
shone like carbuncles, and appeared, with his grinning mouth, to be the
only part of his face in which life survived. Unfortunately the legs
began to refuse their service to this bony machine. During the last five
or six months that this weakness had been felt, the worthy procurator
had nearly become the slave of his wife.

The cousin was received with resignation, that was all. M. Coquenard,
firm upon his legs, would have declined all relationship with M.
Porthos.

“Yes, monsieur, we are cousins,” said Porthos, without being
disconcerted, as he had never reckoned upon being received
enthusiastically by the husband.

“By the female side, I believe?” said the procurator, maliciously.

Porthos did not feel the ridicule of this, and took it for a piece of
simplicity, at which he laughed in his large mustache. Mme. Coquenard,
who knew that a simple-minded procurator was a very rare variety in the
species, smiled a little, and colored a great deal.

M Coquenard had, since the arrival of Porthos, frequently cast his eyes
with great uneasiness upon a large chest placed in front of his oak
desk. Porthos comprehended that this chest, although it did not
correspond in shape with that which he had seen in his dreams, must be
the blessed coffer, and he congratulated himself that the reality was
several feet higher than the dream.

M Coquenard did not carry his genealogical investigations any further;
but withdrawing his anxious look from the chest and fixing it upon
Porthos, he contented himself with saying, “Monsieur our cousin will do
us the favor of dining with us once before his departure for the
campaign, will he not, Madame Coquenard?”

This time Porthos received the blow right in his stomach, and felt it.
It appeared likewise that Mme. Coquenard was not less affected by it on
her part, for she added, “My cousin will not return if he finds that we
do not treat him kindly; but otherwise he has so little time to pass in
Paris, and consequently to spare to us, that we must entreat him to give
us every instant he can call his own previous to his departure.”

“Oh, my legs, my poor legs! where are you?” murmured Coquenard, and he
tried to smile.

This succor, which came to Porthos at the moment in which he was
attacked in his gastronomic hopes, inspired much gratitude in the
Musketeer toward the procurator’s wife.

The hour of dinner soon arrived. They passed into the eating room--a
large dark room situated opposite the kitchen.

The clerks, who, as it appeared, had smelled unusual perfumes in the
house, were of military punctuality, and held their stools in hand quite
ready to sit down. Their jaws moved preliminarily with fearful
threatenings.

“Indeed!” thought Porthos, casting a glance at the three hungry
clerks--for the errand boy, as might be expected, was not admitted to
the honors of the magisterial table, “in my cousin’s place, I would not
keep such gourmands! They look like shipwrecked sailors who have not
eaten for six weeks.”

M Coquenard entered, pushed along upon his armchair with casters by Mme.
Coquenard, whom Porthos assisted in rolling her husband up to the table.
He had scarcely entered when he began to agitate his nose and his jaws
after the example of his clerks.

“Oh, oh!” said he; “here is a soup which is rather inviting.”

“What the devil can they smell so extraordinary in this soup?” said
Porthos, at the sight of a pale liquid, abundant but entirely free from
meat, on the surface of which a few crusts swam about as rare as the
islands of an archipelago.

Mme. Coquenard smiled, and upon a sign from her everyone eagerly took
his seat.

M Coquenard was served first, then Porthos. Afterward Mme. Coquenard
filled her own plate, and distributed the crusts without soup to the
impatient clerks. At this moment the door of the dining room unclosed
with a creak, and Porthos perceived through the half-open flap the
little clerk who, not being allowed to take part in the feast, ate his
dry bread in the passage with the double odor of the dining room and
kitchen.

After the soup the maid brought a boiled fowl--a piece of magnificence
which caused the eyes of the diners to dilate in such a manner that they
seemed ready to burst.

“One may see that you love your family, Madame Coquenard,” said the
procurator, with a smile that was almost tragic. “You are certainly
treating your cousin very handsomely!”

The poor fowl was thin, and covered with one of those thick, bristly
skins through which the teeth cannot penetrate with all their efforts.
The fowl must have been sought for a long time on the perch, to which it
had retired to die of old age.

“The devil!” thought Porthos, “this is poor work. I respect old age, but
I don’t much like it boiled or roasted.”

And he looked round to see if anybody partook of his opinion; but on the
contrary, he saw nothing but eager eyes which were devouring, in
anticipation, that sublime fowl which was the object of his contempt.

Mme. Coquenard drew the dish toward her, skillfully detached the two
great black feet, which she placed upon her husband’s plate, cut off the
neck, which with the head she put on one side for herself, raised the
wing for Porthos, and then returned the bird otherwise intact to the
servant who had brought it in, who disappeared with it before the
Musketeer had time to examine the variations which disappointment
produces upon faces, according to the characters and temperaments of
those who experience it.

In the place of the fowl a dish of haricot beans made its appearance--an
enormous dish in which some bones of mutton that at first sight one
might have believed to have some meat on them pretended to show
themselves.

But the clerks were not the dupes of this deceit, and their lugubrious
looks settled down into resigned countenances.

Mme. Coquenard distributed this dish to the young men with the
moderation of a good housewife.

The time for wine came. M. Coquenard poured from a very small stone
bottle the third of a glass for each of the young men, served himself in
about the same proportion, and passed the bottle to Porthos and Mme.
Coquenard.

The young men filled up their third of a glass with water; then, when
they had drunk half the glass, they filled it up again, and continued to
do so. This brought them, by the end of the repast, to swallowing a
drink which from the color of the ruby had passed to that of a pale
topaz.

Porthos ate his wing of the fowl timidly, and shuddered when he felt the
knee of the procurator’s wife under the table, as it came in search of
his. He also drank half a glass of this sparingly served wine, and found
it to be nothing but that horrible Montreuil--the terror of all expert
palates.

M Coquenard saw him swallowing this wine undiluted, and sighed deeply.

“Will you eat any of these beans, Cousin Porthos?” said Mme. Coquenard,
in that tone which says, “Take my advice, don’t touch them.”

“Devil take me if I taste one of them!” murmured Porthos to himself, and
then said aloud, “Thank you, my cousin, I am no longer hungry.”

There was silence. Porthos could hardly keep his countenance.

The procurator repeated several times, “Ah, Madame Coquenard! Accept my
compliments; your dinner has been a real feast. Lord, how I have eaten!”

M Coquenard had eaten his soup, the black feet of the fowl, and the only
mutton bone on which there was the least appearance of meat.

Porthos fancied they were mystifying him, and began to curl his mustache
and knit his eyebrows; but the knee of Mme. Coquenard gently advised him
to be patient.

This silence and this interruption in serving, which were unintelligible
to Porthos, had, on the contrary, a terrible meaning for the clerks.
Upon a look from the procurator, accompanied by a smile from Mme.
Coquenard, they arose slowly from the table, folded their napkins more
slowly still, bowed, and retired.

“Go, young men! go and promote digestion by working,” said the
procurator, gravely.

The clerks gone, Mme. Coquenard rose and took from a buffet a piece of
cheese, some preserved quinces, and a cake which she had herself made of
almonds and honey.

M Coquenard knit his eyebrows because there were too many good things.
Porthos bit his lips because he saw not the wherewithal to dine. He
looked to see if the dish of beans was still there; the dish of beans
had disappeared.

“A positive feast!” cried M. Coquenard, turning about in his chair, “a
real feast, EPULCE EPULORUM. Lucullus dines with Lucullus.”

Porthos looked at the bottle, which was near him, and hoped that with
wine, bread, and cheese, he might make a dinner; but wine was wanting,
the bottle was empty. M. and Mme. Coquenard did not seem to observe it.

“This is fine!” said Porthos to himself; “I am prettily caught!”

He passed his tongue over a spoonful of preserves, and stuck his teeth
into the sticky pastry of Mme. Coquenard.

“Now,” said he, “the sacrifice is consummated! Ah! if I had not the hope
of peeping with Madame Coquenard into her husband’s chest!”

M Coquenard, after the luxuries of such a repast, which he called an
excess, felt the want of a siesta. Porthos began to hope that the thing
would take place at the present sitting, and in that same locality; but
the procurator would listen to nothing, he would be taken to his room,
and was not satisfied till he was close to his chest, upon the edge of
which, for still greater precaution, he placed his feet.

The procurator’s wife took Porthos into an adjoining room, and they
began to lay the basis of a reconciliation.

“You can come and dine three times a week,” said Mme. Coquenard.

“Thanks, madame!” said Porthos, “but I don’t like to abuse your
kindness; besides, I must think of my outfit!”

“That’s true,” said the procurator’s wife, groaning, “that unfortunate
outfit!”

“Alas, yes,” said Porthos, “it is so.”

“But of what, then, does the equipment of your company consist, Monsieur
Porthos?”

“Oh, of many things!” said Porthos. “The Musketeers are, as you know,
picked soldiers, and they require many things useless to the Guardsmen
or the Swiss.”

“But yet, detail them to me.”

“Why, they may amount to--“, said Porthos, who preferred discussing the
total to taking them one by one.

The procurator’s wife waited tremblingly.

“To how much?” said she. “I hope it does not exceed--” She stopped;
speech failed her.

“Oh, no,” said Porthos, “it does not exceed two thousand five hundred
livres! I even think that with economy I could manage it with two
thousand livres.”

“Good God!” cried she, “two thousand livres! Why, that is a fortune!”

Porthos made a most significant grimace; Mme. Coquenard understood it.

“I wished to know the detail,” said she, “because, having many relatives
in business, I was almost sure of obtaining things at a hundred per cent
less than you would pay yourself.”

“Ah, ah!” said Porthos, “that is what you meant to say!”

“Yes, dear Monsieur Porthos. Thus, for instance, don’t you in the first
place want a horse?”

“Yes, a horse.”

“Well, then! I can just suit you.”

“Ah!” said Porthos, brightening, “that’s well as regards my horse; but I
must have the appointments complete, as they include objects which a
Musketeer alone can purchase, and which will not amount, besides, to
more than three hundred livres.”

“Three hundred livres? Then put down three hundred livres,” said the
procurator’s wife, with a sigh.

Porthos smiled. It may be remembered that he had the saddle which came
from Buckingham. These three hundred livres he reckoned upon putting
snugly into his pocket.

“Then,” continued he, “there is a horse for my lackey, and my valise. As
to my arms, it is useless to trouble you about them; I have them.”

“A horse for your lackey?” resumed the procurator’s wife, hesitatingly;
“but that is doing things in lordly style, my friend.”

“Ah, madame!” said Porthos, haughtily; “do you take me for a beggar?”

“No; I only thought that a pretty mule makes sometimes as good an
appearance as a horse, and it seemed to me that by getting a pretty mule
for Mousqueton--”

“Well, agreed for a pretty mule,” said Porthos; “you are right, I have
seen very great Spanish nobles whose whole suite were mounted on mules.
But then you understand, Madame Coquenard, a mule with feathers and
bells.”

“Be satisfied,” said the procurator’s wife.

“There remains the valise,” added Porthos.

“Oh, don’t let that disturb you,” cried Mme. Coquenard. “My husband has
five or six valises; you shall choose the best. There is one in
particular which he prefers in his journeys, large enough to hold all
the world.”

“Your valise is then empty?” asked Porthos, with simplicity.

“Certainly it is empty,” replied the procurator’s wife, in real
innocence.

“Ah, but the valise I want,” cried Porthos, “is a well-filled one, my
dear.”

Madame uttered fresh sighs. Moliere had not written his scene in
“L’Avare” then. Mme. Coquenard was in the dilemma of Harpagan.

Finally, the rest of the equipment was successively debated in the same
manner; and the result of the sitting was that the procurator’s wife
should give eight hundred livres in money, and should furnish the horse
and the mule which should have the honor of carrying Porthos and
Mousqueton to glory.

These conditions being agreed to, Porthos took leave of Mme. Coquenard.
The latter wished to detain him by darting certain tender glances; but
Porthos urged the commands of duty, and the procurator’s wife was
obliged to give place to the king.

The Musketeer returned home hungry and in bad humor.




33 SOUBRETTE AND MISTRESS


Meantime, as we have said, despite the cries of his conscience and the
wise counsels of Athos, d’Artagnan became hourly more in love with
Milady. Thus he never failed to pay his diurnal court to her; and the
self-satisfied Gascon was convinced that sooner or later she could not
fail to respond.

One day, when he arrived with his head in the air, and as light at heart
as a man who awaits a shower of gold, he found the SOUBRETTE under the
gateway of the hotel; but this time the pretty Kitty was not contented
with touching him as he passed, she took him gently by the hand.

“Good!” thought d’Artagnan, “She is charged with some message for me
from her mistress; she is about to appoint some rendezvous of which she
had not courage to speak.” And he looked down at the pretty girl with
the most triumphant air imaginable.

“I wish to say three words to you, Monsieur Chevalier,” stammered the
SOUBRETTE.

“Speak, my child, speak,” said d’Artagnan; “I listen.”

“Here? Impossible! That which I have to say is too long, and above all,
too secret.”

“Well, what is to be done?”

“If Monsieur Chevalier would follow me?” said Kitty, timidly.

“Where you please, my dear child.”

“Come, then.”

And Kitty, who had not let go the hand of d’Artagnan, led him up a
little dark, winding staircase, and after ascending about fifteen steps,
opened a door.

“Come in here, Monsieur Chevalier,” said she; “here we shall be alone,
and can talk.”

“And whose room is this, my dear child?”

“It is mine, Monsieur Chevalier; it communicates with my mistress’s by
that door. But you need not fear. She will not hear what we say; she
never goes to bed before midnight.”

D’Artagnan cast a glance around him. The little apartment was charming
for its taste and neatness; but in spite of himself, his eyes were
directed to that door which Kitty said led to Milady’s chamber.

Kitty guessed what was passing in the mind of the young man, and heaved
a deep sigh.

“You love my mistress, then, very dearly, Monsieur Chevalier?” said she.

“Oh, more than I can say, Kitty! I am mad for her!”

Kitty breathed a second sigh.

“Alas, monsieur,” said she, “that is too bad.”

“What the devil do you see so bad in it?” said d’Artagnan.

“Because, monsieur,” replied Kitty, “my mistress loves you not at all.”

“HEIN!” said d’Artagnan, “can she have charged you to tell me so?”

“Oh, no, monsieur; but out of the regard I have for you, I have taken
the resolution to tell you so.”

“Much obliged, my dear Kitty; but for the intention only--for the
information, you must agree, is not likely to be at all agreeable.”

“That is to say, you don’t believe what I have told you; is it not so?”

“We have always some difficulty in believing such things, my pretty
dear, were it only from self-love.”

“Then you don’t believe me?”

“I confess that unless you deign to give me some proof of what you
advance--”

“What do you think of this?”

Kitty drew a little note from her bosom.

“For me?” said d’Artagnan, seizing the letter.

“No; for another.”

“For another?”

“Yes.”

“His name; his name!” cried d’Artagnan.

“Read the address.”

“Monsieur El Comte de Wardes.”

The remembrance of the scene at St. Germain presented itself to the mind
of the presumptuous Gascon. As quick as thought, he tore open the
letter, in spite of the cry which Kitty uttered on seeing what he was
going to do, or rather, what he was doing.

“Oh, good Lord, Monsieur Chevalier,” said she, “what are you doing?”

“I?” said d’Artagnan; “nothing,” and he read,

“You have not answered my first note. Are you indisposed, or have you
forgotten the glances you favored me with at the ball of Mme. de Guise?
You have an opportunity now, Count; do not allow it to escape.”

d’Artagnan became very pale; he was wounded in his SELF-love: he thought
that it was in his LOVE.

“Poor dear Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Kitty, in a voice full of
compassion, and pressing anew the young man’s hand.

“You pity me, little one?” said d’Artagnan.

“Oh, yes, and with all my heart; for I know what it is to be in love.”

“You know what it is to be in love?” said d’Artagnan, looking at her for
the first time with much attention.

“Alas, yes.”

“Well, then, instead of pitying me, you would do much better to assist
me in avenging myself on your mistress.”

“And what sort of revenge would you take?”

“I would triumph over her, and supplant my rival.”

“I will never help you in that, Monsieur Chevalier,” said Kitty, warmly.

“And why not?” demanded d’Artagnan.

“For two reasons.”

“What ones?”

“The first is that my mistress will never love you.”

“How do you know that?”

“You have cut her to the heart.”

“I? In what can I have offended her--I who ever since I have known her
have lived at her feet like a slave? Speak, I beg you!”

“I will never confess that but to the man--who should read to the bottom
of my soul!”

D’Artagnan looked at Kitty for the second time. The young girl had
freshness and beauty which many duchesses would have purchased with
their coronets.

“Kitty,” said he, “I will read to the bottom of your soul when-ever you
like; don’t let that disturb you.” And he gave her a kiss at which the
poor girl became as red as a cherry.

“Oh, no,” said Kitty, “it is not me you love! It is my mistress you
love; you told me so just now.”

“And does that hinder you from letting me know the second reason?”

“The second reason, Monsieur the Chevalier,” replied Kitty, emboldened
by the kiss in the first place, and still further by the expression of
the eyes of the young man, “is that in love, everyone for herself!”

Then only d’Artagnan remembered the languishing glances of Kitty, her
constantly meeting him in the antechamber, the corridor, or on the
stairs, those touches of the hand every time she met him, and her deep
sighs; but absorbed by his desire to please the great lady, he had
disdained the soubrette. He whose game is the eagle takes no heed of the
sparrow.

But this time our Gascon saw at a glance all the advantage to be derived
from the love which Kitty had just confessed so innocently, or so
boldly: the interception of letters addressed to the Comte de Wardes,
news on the spot, entrance at all hours into Kitty’s chamber, which was
contiguous to her mistress’s. The perfidious deceiver was, as may
plainly be perceived, already sacrificing, in intention, the poor girl
in order to obtain Milady, willy-nilly.

“Well,” said he to the young girl, “are you willing, my dear Kitty, that
I should give you a proof of that love which you doubt?”

“What love?” asked the young girl.

“Of that which I am ready to feel toward you.”

“And what is that proof?”

“Are you willing that I should this evening pass with you the time I
generally spend with your mistress?”

“Oh, yes,” said Kitty, clapping her hands, “very willing.”

“Well, then, come here, my dear,” said d’Artagnan, establishing himself
in an easy chair; “come, and let me tell you that you are the prettiest
SOUBRETTE I ever saw!”

And he did tell her so much, and so well, that the poor girl, who asked
nothing better than to believe him, did believe him. Nevertheless, to
d’Artagnan’s great astonishment, the pretty Kitty defended herself
resolutely.

Time passes quickly when it is passed in attacks and defenses. Midnight
sounded, and almost at the same time the bell was rung in Milady’s
chamber.

“Good God,” cried Kitty, “there is my mistress calling me! Go; go
directly!”

D’Artagnan rose, took his hat, as if it had been his intention to obey,
then, opening quickly the door of a large closet instead of that leading
to the staircase, he buried himself amid the robes and dressing gowns of
Milady.

“What are you doing?” cried Kitty.

D’Artagnan, who had secured the key, shut himself up in the closet
without reply.

“Well,” cried Milady, in a sharp voice. “Are you asleep, that you don’t
answer when I ring?”

And d’Artagnan heard the door of communication opened violently.

“Here am I, Milady, here am I!” cried Kitty, springing forward to meet
her mistress.

Both went into the bedroom, and as the door of communication remained
open, d’Artagnan could hear Milady for some time scolding her maid. She
was at length appeased, and the conversation turned upon him while Kitty
was assisting her mistress.

“Well,” said Milady, “I have not seen our Gascon this evening.”

“What, Milady! has he not come?” said Kitty. “Can he be inconstant
before being happy?”

“Oh, no; he must have been prevented by Monsieur de Treville or Monsieur
Dessessart. I understand my game, Kitty; I have this one safe.”

“What will you do with him, madame?”

“What will I do with him? Be easy, Kitty, there is something between
that man and me that he is quite ignorant of: he nearly made me lose my
credit with his Eminence. Oh, I will be revenged!”

“I believed that Madame loved him.”

“I love him? I detest him! An idiot, who held the life of Lord de Winter
in his hands and did not kill him, by which I missed three hundred
thousand livres’ income.”

“That’s true,” said Kitty; “your son was the only heir of his uncle, and
until his majority you would have had the enjoyment of his fortune.”

D’Artagnan shuddered to the marrow at hearing this suave creature
reproach him, with that sharp voice which she took such pains to conceal
in conversation, for not having killed a man whom he had seen load her
with kindnesses.

“For all this,” continued Milady, “I should long ago have revenged
myself on him if, and I don’t know why, the cardinal had not requested
me to conciliate him.”

“Oh, yes; but Madame has not conciliated that little woman he was so
fond of.”

“What, the mercer’s wife of the Rue des Fossoyeurs? Has he not already
forgotten she ever existed? Fine vengeance that, on my faith!”

A cold sweat broke from d’Artagnan’s brow. Why, this woman was a
monster! He resumed his listening, but unfortunately the toilet was
finished.

“That will do,” said Milady; “go into your own room, and tomorrow
endeavor again to get me an answer to the letter I gave you.”

“For Monsieur de Wardes?” said Kitty.

“To be sure; for Monsieur de Wardes.”

“Now, there is one,” said Kitty, “who appears to me quite a different
sort of a man from that poor Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“Go to bed, mademoiselle,” said Milady; “I don’t like comments.”

D’Artagnan heard the door close; then the noise of two bolts by which
Milady fastened herself in. On her side, but as softly as possible,
Kitty turned the key of the lock, and then d’Artagnan opened the closet
door.

“Oh, good Lord!” said Kitty, in a low voice, “what is the matter with
you? How pale you are!”

“The abominable creature,” murmured d’Artagnan.

“Silence, silence, begone!” said Kitty. “There is nothing but a wainscot
between my chamber and Milady’s; every word that is uttered in one can
be heard in the other.”

“That’s exactly the reason I won’t go,” said d’Artagnan.

“What!” said Kitty, blushing.

“Or, at least, I will go--later.”

He drew Kitty to him. She had the less motive to resist, resistance
would make so much noise. Therefore Kitty surrendered.

It was a movement of vengeance upon Milady. D’Artagnan believed it right
to say that vengeance is the pleasure of the gods. With a little more
heart, he might have been contented with this new conquest; but the
principal features of his character were ambition and pride. It must,
however, be confessed in his justification that the first use he made of
his influence over Kitty was to try and find out what had become of Mme.
Bonacieux; but the poor girl swore upon the crucifix to d’Artagnan that
she was entirely ignorant on that head, her mistress never admitting her
into half her secrets--only she believed she could say she was not dead.

As to the cause which was near making Milady lose her credit with the
cardinal, Kitty knew nothing about it; but this time d’Artagnan was
better informed than she was. As he had seen Milady on board a vessel at
the moment he was leaving England, he suspected that it was, almost
without a doubt, on account of the diamond studs.

But what was clearest in all this was that the true hatred, the profound
hatred, the inveterate hatred of Milady, was increased by his not having
killed her brother-in-law.

D’Artagnan came the next day to Milady’s, and finding her in a very
ill-humor, had no doubt that it was lack of an answer from M. de Wardes
that provoked her thus. Kitty came in, but Milady was very cross with
her. The poor girl ventured a glance at d’Artagnan which said, “See how
I suffer on your account!”

Toward the end of the evening, however, the beautiful lioness became
milder; she smilingly listened to the soft speeches of d’Artagnan, and
even gave him her hand to kiss.

D’Artagnan departed, scarcely knowing what to think, but as he was a
youth who did not easily lose his head, while continuing to pay his
court to Milady, he had framed a little plan in his mind.

He found Kitty at the gate, and, as on the preceding evening, went up to
her chamber. Kitty had been accused of negligence and severely scolded.
Milady could not at all comprehend the silence of the Comte de Wardes,
and she ordered Kitty to come at nine o’clock in the morning to take a
third letter.

D’Artagnan made Kitty promise to bring him that letter on the following
morning. The poor girl promised all her lover desired; she was mad.

Things passed as on the night before. D’Artagnan concealed himself in
his closet; Milady called, undressed, sent away Kitty, and shut the
door. As the night before, d’Artagnan did not return home till five
o’clock in the morning.

At eleven o’clock Kitty came to him. She held in her hand a fresh billet
from Milady. This time the poor girl did not even argue with d’Artagnan;
she gave it to him at once. She belonged body and soul to her handsome
soldier.

D’Artagnan opened the letter and read as follows:

This is the third time I have written to you to tell you that I love
you. Beware that I do not write to you a fourth time to tell you that I
detest you.

If you repent of the manner in which you have acted toward me, the young
girl who brings you this will tell you how a man of spirit may obtain
his pardon.

d’Artagnan colored and grew pale several times in reading this billet.

“Oh, you love her still,” said Kitty, who had not taken her eyes off the
young man’s countenance for an instant.

“No, Kitty, you are mistaken. I do not love her, but I will avenge
myself for her contempt.”

“Oh, yes, I know what sort of vengeance! You told me that!”

“What matters it to you, Kitty? You know it is you alone whom I love.”

“How can I know that?”

“By the scorn I will throw upon her.”

D’Artagnan took a pen and wrote:

Madame, Until the present moment I could not believe that it was to me
your first two letters were addressed, so unworthy did I feel myself of
such an honor; besides, I was so seriously indisposed that I could not
in any case have replied to them.

But now I am forced to believe in the excess of your kindness, since not
only your letter but your servant assures me that I have the good
fortune to be beloved by you.

She has no occasion to teach me the way in which a man of spirit may
obtain his pardon. I will come and ask mine at eleven o’clock this
evening.

To delay it a single day would be in my eyes now to commit a fresh
offense.

From him whom you have rendered the happiest of men, Comte de Wardes

This note was in the first place a forgery; it was likewise an
indelicacy. It was even, according to our present manners, something
like an infamous action; but at that period people did not manage
affairs as they do today. Besides, d’Artagnan from her own admission
knew Milady culpable of treachery in matters more important, and could
entertain no respect for her. And yet, notwithstanding this want of
respect, he felt an uncontrollable passion for this woman boiling in his
veins--passion drunk with contempt; but passion or thirst, as the reader
pleases.

D’Artagnan’s plan was very simple. By Kitty’s chamber he could gain that
of her mistress. He would take advantage of the first moment of
surprise, shame, and terror, to triumph over her. He might fail, but
something must be left to chance. In eight days the campaign would open,
and he would be compelled to leave Paris; d’Artagnan had no time for a
prolonged love siege.

“There,” said the young man, handing Kitty the letter sealed; “give that
to Milady. It is the count’s reply.”

Poor Kitty became as pale as death; she suspected what the letter
contained.

“Listen, my dear girl,” said d’Artagnan; “you cannot but perceive that
all this must end, some way or other. Milady may discover that you gave
the first billet to my lackey instead of to the count’s; that it is I
who have opened the others which ought to have been opened by de Wardes.
Milady will then turn you out of doors, and you know she is not the
woman to limit her vengeance.”

“Alas!” said Kitty, “for whom have I exposed myself to all that?”

“For me, I well know, my sweet girl,” said d’Artagnan. “But I am
grateful, I swear to you.”

“But what does this note contain?”

“Milady will tell you.”

“Ah, you do not love me!” cried Kitty, “and I am very wretched.”

To this reproach there is always one response which deludes women.
D’Artagnan replied in such a manner that Kitty remained in her great
delusion. Although she cried freely before deciding to transmit the
letter to her mistress, she did at last so decide, which was all
d’Artagnan wished. Finally he promised that he would leave her
mistress’s presence at an early hour that evening, and that when he left
the mistress he would ascend with the maid. This promise completed poor
Kitty’s consolation.




34 IN WHICH THE EQUIPMENT OF ARAMIS AND PORTHOS IS TREATED OF


Since the four friends had been each in search of his equipments, there
had been no fixed meeting between them. They dined apart from one
another, wherever they might happen to be, or rather where they could.
Duty likewise on its part took a portion of that precious time which was
gliding away so rapidly--only they had agreed to meet once a week, about
one o’clock, at the residence of Athos, seeing that he, in agreement
with the vow he had formed, did not pass over the threshold of his door.

This day of reunion was the same day as that on which Kitty came to find
d’Artagnan. Soon as Kitty left him, d’Artagnan directed his steps toward
the Rue Ferou.

He found Athos and Aramis philosophizing. Aramis had some slight
inclination to resume the cassock. Athos, according to his system,
neither encouraged nor dissuaded him. Athos believed that everyone
should be left to his own free will. He never gave advice but when it
was asked, and even then he required to be asked twice.

“People, in general,” he said, “only ask advice not to follow it; or if
they do follow it, it is for the sake of having someone to blame for
having given it.”

Porthos arrived a minute after d’Artagnan. The four friends were
reunited.

The four countenances expressed four different feelings: that of
Porthos, tranquillity; that of d’Artagnan, hope; that of Aramis,
uneasiness; that of Athos, carelessness.

At the end of a moment’s conversation, in which Porthos hinted that a
lady of elevated rank had condescended to relieve him from his
embarrassment, Mousqueton entered. He came to request his master to
return to his lodgings, where his presence was urgent, as he piteously
said.

“Is it my equipment?”

“Yes and no,” replied Mousqueton.

“Well, but can’t you speak?”

“Come, monsieur.”

Porthos rose, saluted his friends, and followed Mousqueton. An instant
after, Bazin made his appearance at the door.

“What do you want with me, my friend?” said Aramis, with that mildness
of language which was observable in him every time that his ideas were
directed toward the Church.

“A man wishes to see Monsieur at home,” replied Bazin.

“A man! What man?”

“A mendicant.”

“Give him alms, Bazin, and bid him pray for a poor sinner.”

“This mendicant insists upon speaking to you, and pretends that you will
be very glad to see him.”

“Has he sent no particular message for me?”

“Yes. If Monsieur Aramis hesitates to come,” he said, “tell him I am
from Tours.”

“From Tours!” cried Aramis. “A thousand pardons, gentlemen; but no doubt
this man brings me the news I expected.” And rising also, he went off at
a quick pace. There remained Athos and d’Artagnan.

“I believe these fellows have managed their business. What do you think,
d’Artagnan?” said Athos.

“I know that Porthos was in a fair way,” replied d’Artagnan; “and as to
Aramis to tell you the truth, I have never been seriously uneasy on his
account. But you, my dear Athos--you, who so generously distributed the
Englishman’s pistoles, which were our legitimate property--what do you
mean to do?”

“I am satisfied with having killed that fellow, my boy, seeing that it
is blessed bread to kill an Englishman; but if I had pocketed his
pistoles, they would have weighed me down like a remorse.”

“Go to, my dear Athos; you have truly inconceivable ideas.”

“Let it pass. What do you think of Monsieur de Treville telling me, when
he did me the honor to call upon me yesterday, that you associated with
the suspected English, whom the cardinal protects?”

“That is to say, I visit an Englishwoman--the one I named.”

“Oh, ay! the fair woman on whose account I gave you advice, which
naturally you took care not to adopt.”

“I gave you my reasons.”

“Yes; you look there for your outfit, I think you said.”

“Not at all. I have acquired certain knowledge that that woman was
concerned in the abduction of Madame Bonacieux.”

“Yes, I understand now: to find one woman, you court another. It is the
longest road, but certainly the most amusing.”

D’Artagnan was on the point of telling Athos all; but one consideration
restrained him. Athos was a gentleman, punctilious in points of honor;
and there were in the plan which our lover had devised for Milady, he
was sure, certain things that would not obtain the assent of this
Puritan. He was therefore silent; and as Athos was the least inquisitive
of any man on earth, d’Artagnan’s confidence stopped there. We will
therefore leave the two friends, who had nothing important to say to
each other, and follow Aramis.

Upon being informed that the person who wanted to speak to him came from
Tours, we have seen with what rapidity the young man followed, or rather
went before, Bazin; he ran without stopping from the Rue Ferou to the
Rue de Vaugirard. On entering he found a man of short stature and
intelligent eyes, but covered with rags.

“You have asked for me?” said the Musketeer.

“I wish to speak with Monsieur Aramis. Is that your name, monsieur?”

“My very own. You have brought me something?”

“Yes, if you show me a certain embroidered handkerchief.”

“Here it is,” said Aramis, taking a small key from his breast and
opening a little ebony box inlaid with mother of pearl, “here it is.
Look.”

“That is right,” replied the mendicant; “dismiss your lackey.”

In fact, Bazin, curious to know what the mendicant could want with his
master, kept pace with him as well as he could, and arrived almost at
the same time he did; but his quickness was not of much use to him. At
the hint from the mendicant his master made him a sign to retire, and he
was obliged to obey.

Bazin gone, the mendicant cast a rapid glance around him in order to be
sure that nobody could either see or hear him, and opening his ragged
vest, badly held together by a leather strap, he began to rip the upper
part of his doublet, from which he drew a letter.

Aramis uttered a cry of joy at the sight of the seal, kissed the
superscription with an almost religious respect, and opened the epistle,
which contained what follows:

“My Friend, it is the will of fate that we should be still for some time
separated; but the delightful days of youth are not lost beyond return.
Perform your duty in camp; I will do mine elsewhere. Accept that which
the bearer brings you; make the campaign like a handsome true gentleman,
and think of me, who kisses tenderly your black eyes.

“Adieu; or rather, AU REVOIR.”

The mendicant continued to rip his garments; and drew from amid his rags
a hundred and fifty Spanish double pistoles, which he laid down on the
table; then he opened the door, bowed, and went out before the young
man, stupefied by his letter, had ventured to address a word to him.

Aramis then reperused the letter, and perceived a postscript:

PS. You may behave politely to the bearer, who is a count and a grandee
of Spain!

“Golden dreams!” cried Aramis. “Oh, beautiful life! Yes, we are young;
yes, we shall yet have happy days! My love, my blood, my life! all, all,
all, are thine, my adored mistress!”

And he kissed the letter with passion, without even vouchsafing a look
at the gold which sparkled on the table.

Bazin scratched at the door, and as Aramis had no longer any reason to
exclude him, he bade him come in.

Bazin was stupefied at the sight of the gold, and forgot that he came to
announce d’Artagnan, who, curious to know who the mendicant could be,
came to Aramis on leaving Athos.

Now, as d’Artagnan used no ceremony with Aramis, seeing that Bazin
forgot to announce him, he announced himself.

“The devil! my dear Aramis,” said d’Artagnan, “if these are the prunes
that are sent to you from Tours, I beg you will make my compliments to
the gardener who gathers them.”

“You are mistaken, friend d’Artagnan,” said Aramis, always on his guard;
“this is from my publisher, who has just sent me the price of that poem
in one-syllable verse which I began yonder.”

“Ah, indeed,” said d’Artagnan. “Well, your publisher is very generous,
my dear Aramis, that’s all I can say.”

“How, monsieur?” cried Bazin, “a poem sell so dear as that! It is
incredible! Oh, monsieur, you can write as much as you like; you may
become equal to Monsieur de Voiture and Monsieur de Benserade. I like
that. A poet is as good as an abbe. Ah! Monsieur Aramis, become a poet,
I beg of you.”

“Bazin, my friend,” said Aramis, “I believe you meddle with my
conversation.”

Bazin perceived he was wrong; he bowed and went out.

“Ah!” said d’Artagnan with a smile, “you sell your productions at their
weight in gold. You are very fortunate, my friend; but take care or you
will lose that letter which is peeping from your doublet, and which also
comes, no doubt, from your publisher.”

Aramis blushed to the eyes, crammed in the letter, and re-buttoned his
doublet.

“My dear d’Artagnan,” said he, “if you please, we will join our friends;
as I am rich, we will today begin to dine together again, expecting that
you will be rich in your turn.”

“My faith!” said d’Artagnan, with great pleasure. “It is long since we
have had a good dinner; and I, for my part, have a somewhat hazardous
expedition for this evening, and shall not be sorry, I confess, to
fortify myself with a few glasses of good old Burgundy.”

“Agreed, as to the old Burgundy; I have no objection to that,” said
Aramis, from whom the letter and the gold had removed, as by magic, his
ideas of conversion.

And having put three or four double pistoles into his pocket to answer
the needs of the moment, he placed the others in the ebony box, inlaid
with mother of pearl, in which was the famous handkerchief which served
him as a talisman.

The two friends repaired to Athos’s, and he, faithful to his vow of not
going out, took upon him to order dinner to be brought to them. As he
was perfectly acquainted with the details of gastronomy, d’Artagnan and
Aramis made no objection to abandoning this important care to him.

They went to find Porthos, and at the corner of the Rue Bac met
Mousqueton, who, with a most pitiable air, was driving before him a mule
and a horse.

D’Artagnan uttered a cry of surprise, which was not quite free from joy.

“Ah, my yellow horse,” cried he. “Aramis, look at that horse!”

“Oh, the frightful brute!” said Aramis.

“Ah, my dear,” replied d’Artagnan, “upon that very horse I came to
Paris.”

“What, does Monsieur know this horse?” said Mousqueton.

“It is of an original color,” said Aramis; “I never saw one with such a
hide in my life.”

“I can well believe it,” replied d’Artagnan, “and that was why I got
three crowns for him. It must have been for his hide, for, CERTES, the
carcass is not worth eighteen livres. But how did this horse come into
your hands, Mousqueton?”

“Pray,” said the lackey, “say nothing about it, monsieur; it is a
frightful trick of the husband of our duchess!”

“How is that, Mousqueton?”

“Why, we are looked upon with a rather favorable eye by a lady of
quality, the Duchesse de--but, your pardon; my master has commanded me
to be discreet. She had forced us to accept a little souvenir, a
magnificent Spanish GENET and an Andalusian mule, which were beautiful
to look upon. The husband heard of the affair; on their way he
confiscated the two magnificent beasts which were being sent to us, and
substituted these horrible animals.”

“Which you are taking back to him?” said d’Artagnan.

“Exactly!” replied Mousqueton. “You may well believe that we will not
accept such steeds as these in exchange for those which had been
promised to us.”

“No, PARDIEU; though I should like to have seen Porthos on my yellow
horse. That would give me an idea of how I looked when I arrived in
Paris. But don’t let us hinder you, Mousqueton; go and perform your
master’s orders. Is he at home?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said Mousqueton, “but in a very ill humor. Get up!”

He continued his way toward the Quai des Grands Augustins, while the two
friends went to ring at the bell of the unfortunate Porthos. He, having
seen them crossing the yard, took care not to answer, and they rang in
vain.

Meanwhile Mousqueton continued on his way, and crossing the Pont Neuf,
still driving the two sorry animals before him, he reached the Rue aux
Ours. Arrived there, he fastened, according to the orders of his master,
both horse and mule to the knocker of the procurator’s door; then,
without taking any thought for their future, he returned to Porthos, and
told him that his commission was completed.

In a short time the two unfortunate beasts, who had not eaten anything
since the morning, made such a noise in raising and letting fall the
knocker that the procurator ordered his errand boy to go and inquire in
the neighborhood to whom this horse and mule belonged.

Mme. Coquenard recognized her present, and could not at first comprehend
this restitution; but the visit of Porthos soon enlightened her. The
anger which fired the eyes of the Musketeer, in spite of his efforts to
suppress it, terrified his sensitive inamorata. In fact, Mousqueton had
not concealed from his master that he had met d’Artagnan and Aramis, and
that d’Artagnan in the yellow horse had recognized the Bearnese pony
upon which he had come to Paris, and which he had sold for three crowns.

Porthos went away after having appointed a meeting with the procurator’s
wife in the cloister of St. Magloire. The procurator, seeing he was
going, invited him to dinner--an invitation which the Musketeer refused
with a majestic air.

Mme. Coquenard repaired trembling to the cloister of St. Magloire, for
she guessed the reproaches that awaited her there; but she was
fascinated by the lofty airs of Porthos.

All that which a man wounded in his self-love could let fall in the
shape of imprecations and reproaches upon the head of a woman Porthos
let fall upon the bowed head of the procurator’s wife.

“Alas,” said she, “I did all for the best! One of our clients is a
horsedealer; he owes money to the office, and is backward in his pay. I
took the mule and the horse for what he owed us; he assured me that they
were two noble steeds.”

“Well, madame,” said Porthos, “if he owed you more than five crowns,
your horsedealer is a thief.”

“There is no harm in trying to buy things cheap, Monsieur Porthos,” said
the procurator’s wife, seeking to excuse herself.

“No, madame; but they who so assiduously try to buy things cheap ought
to permit others to seek more generous friends.” And Porthos, turning on
his heel, made a step to retire.

“Monsieur Porthos! Monsieur Porthos!” cried the procurator’s wife. “I
have been wrong; I see it. I ought not to have driven a bargain when it
was to equip a cavalier like you.”

Porthos, without reply, retreated a second step. The procurator’s wife
fancied she saw him in a brilliant cloud, all surrounded by duchesses
and marchionesses, who cast bags of money at his feet.

“Stop, in the name of heaven, Monsieur Porthos!” cried she. “Stop, and
let us talk.”

“Talking with you brings me misfortune,” said Porthos.

“But, tell me, what do you ask?”

“Nothing; for that amounts to the same thing as if I asked you for
something.”

The procurator’s wife hung upon the arm of Porthos, and in the violence
of her grief she cried out, “Monsieur Porthos, I am ignorant of all such
matters! How should I know what a horse is? How should I know what horse
furniture is?”

“You should have left it to me, then, madame, who know what they are;
but you wished to be frugal, and consequently to lend at usury.”

“It was wrong, Monsieur Porthos; but I will repair that wrong, upon my
word of honor.”

“How so?” asked the Musketeer.

“Listen. This evening M. Coquenard is going to the house of the Due de
Chaulnes, who has sent for him. It is for a consultation, which will
last three hours at least. Come! We shall be alone, and can make up our
accounts.”

“In good time. Now you talk, my dear.”

“You pardon me?”

“We shall see,” said Porthos, majestically; and the two separated
saying, “Till this evening.”

“The devil!” thought Porthos, as he walked away, “it appears I am
getting nearer to Monsieur Coquenard’s strongbox at last.”




35 A GASCON A MATCH FOR CUPID


The evening so impatiently waited for by Porthos and by d’Artagnan at
last arrived.

As was his custom, d’Artagnan presented himself at Milady’s at about
nine o’clock. He found her in a charming humor. Never had he been so
well received. Our Gascon knew, by the first glance of his eye, that his
billet had been delivered, and that this billet had had its effect.

Kitty entered to bring some sherbet. Her mistress put on a charming
face, and smiled on her graciously; but alas! the poor girl was so sad
that she did not even notice Milady’s condescension.

D’Artagnan looked at the two women, one after the other, and was forced
to acknowledge that in his opinion Dame Nature had made a mistake in
their formation. To the great lady she had given a heart vile and venal;
to the SOUBRETTE she had given the heart of a duchess.

At ten o’clock Milady began to appear restless. D’Artagnan knew what she
wanted. She looked at the clock, rose, reseated herself, smiled at
d’Artagnan with an air which said, “You are very amiable, no doubt, but
you would be charming if you would only depart.”

D’Artagnan rose and took his hat; Milady gave him her hand to kiss. The
young man felt her press his hand, and comprehended that this was a
sentiment, not of coquetry, but of gratitude because of his departure.

“She loves him devilishly,” he murmured. Then he went out.

This time Kitty was nowhere waiting for him; neither in the antechamber,
nor in the corridor, nor beneath the great door. It was necessary that
d’Artagnan should find alone the staircase and the little chamber. She
heard him enter, but she did not raise her head. The young man went to
her and took her hands; then she sobbed aloud.

As d’Artagnan had presumed, on receiving his letter, Milady in a
delirium of joy had told her servant everything; and by way of
recompense for the manner in which she had this time executed the
commission, she had given Kitty a purse.

Returning to her own room, Kitty had thrown the purse into a corner,
where it lay open, disgorging three or four gold pieces on the carpet.
The poor girl, under the caresses of d’Artagnan, lifted her head.
D’Artagnan himself was frightened by the change in her countenance. She
joined her hands with a suppliant air, but without venturing to speak a
word. As little sensitive as was the heart of d’Artagnan, he was touched
by this mute sorrow; but he held too tenaciously to his projects, above
all to this one, to change the program which he had laid out in advance.
He did not therefore allow her any hope that he would flinch; only he
represented his action as one of simple vengeance.

For the rest this vengeance was very easy; for Milady, doubtless to
conceal her blushes from her lover, had ordered Kitty to extinguish all
the lights in the apartment, and even in the little chamber itself.
Before daybreak M. de Wardes must take his departure, still in
obscurity.

Presently they heard Milady retire to her room. D’Artagnan slipped into
the wardrobe. Hardly was he concealed when the little bell sounded.
Kitty went to her mistress, and did not leave the door open; but the
partition was so thin that one could hear nearly all that passed between
the two women.

Milady seemed overcome with joy, and made Kitty repeat the smallest
details of the pretended interview of the soubrette with de Wardes when
he received the letter; how he had responded; what was the expression of
his face; if he seemed very amorous. And to all these questions poor
Kitty, forced to put on a pleasant face, responded in a stifled voice
whose dolorous accent her mistress did not however remark, solely
because happiness is egotistical.

Finally, as the hour for her interview with the count approached, Milady
had everything about her darkened, and ordered Kitty to return to her
own chamber, and introduce de Wardes whenever he presented himself.

Kitty’s detention was not long. Hardly had d’Artagnan seen, through a
crevice in his closet, that the whole apartment was in obscurity, than
he slipped out of his concealment, at the very moment when Kitty
reclosed the door of communication.

“What is that noise?” demanded Milady.

“It is I,” said d’Artagnan in a subdued voice, “I, the Comte de Wardes.”

“Oh, my God, my God!” murmured Kitty, “he has not even waited for the
hour he himself named!”

“Well,” said Milady, in a trembling voice, “why do you not enter? Count,
Count,” added she, “you know that I wait for you.”

At this appeal d’Artagnan drew Kitty quietly away, and slipped into the
chamber.

If rage or sorrow ever torture the heart, it is when a lover receives
under a name which is not his own protestations of love addressed to his
happy rival. D’Artagnan was in a dolorous situation which he had not
foreseen. Jealousy gnawed his heart; and he suffered almost as much as
poor Kitty, who at that very moment was crying in the next chamber.

“Yes, Count,” said Milady, in her softest voice, and pressing his hand
in her own, “I am happy in the love which your looks and your words have
expressed to me every time we have met. I also--I love you. Oh,
tomorrow, tomorrow, I must have some pledge from you which will prove
that you think of me; and that you may not forget me, take this!” and
she slipped a ring from her finger onto d’Artagnan’s. D’Artagnan
remembered having seen this ring on the finger of Milady; it was a
magnificent sapphire, encircled with brilliants.

The first movement of d’Artagnan was to return it, but Milady added,
“No, no! Keep that ring for love of me. Besides, in accepting it,” she
added, in a voice full of emotion, “you render me a much greater service
than you imagine.”

“This woman is full of mysteries,” murmured d’Artagnan to himself. At
that instant he felt himself ready to reveal all. He even opened his
mouth to tell Milady who he was, and with what a revengeful purpose he
had come; but she added, “Poor angel, whom that monster of a Gascon
barely failed to kill.”

The monster was himself.

“Oh,” continued Milady, “do your wounds still make you suffer?”

“Yes, much,” said d’Artagnan, who did not well know how to answer.

“Be tranquil,” murmured Milady; “I will avenge you--and cruelly!”

“PESTE!” said d’Artagnan to himself, “the moment for confidences has not
yet come.”

It took some time for d’Artagnan to resume this little dialogue; but
then all the ideas of vengeance which he had brought with him had
completely vanished. This woman exercised over him an unaccountable
power; he hated and adored her at the same time. He would not have
believed that two sentiments so opposite could dwell in the same heart,
and by their union constitute a passion so strange, and as it were,
diabolical.

Presently it sounded one o’clock. It was necessary to separate.
D’Artagnan at the moment of quitting Milady felt only the liveliest
regret at the parting; and as they addressed each other in a
reciprocally passionate adieu, another interview was arranged for the
following week.

Poor Kitty hoped to speak a few words to d’Artagnan when he passed
through her chamber; but Milady herself reconducted him through the
darkness, and only quit him at the staircase.

The next morning d’Artagnan ran to find Athos. He was engaged in an
adventure so singular that he wished for counsel. He therefore told him
all.

“Your Milady,” said he, “appears to be an infamous creature, but not the
less you have done wrong to deceive her. In one fashion or another you
have a terrible enemy on your hands.”

While thus speaking Athos regarded with attention the sapphire set with
diamonds which had taken, on d’Artagnan’s finger, the place of the
queen’s ring, carefully kept in a casket.

“You notice my ring?” said the Gascon, proud to display so rich a gift
in the eyes of his friends.

“Yes,” said Athos, “it reminds me of a family jewel.”

“It is beautiful, is it not?” said d’Artagnan.

“Yes,” said Athos, “magnificent. I did not think two sapphires of such a
fine water existed. Have you traded it for your diamond?”

“No. It is a gift from my beautiful Englishwoman, or rather
Frenchwoman--for I am convinced she was born in France, though I have
not questioned her.”

“That ring comes from Milady?” cried Athos, with a voice in which it was
easy to detect strong emotion.

“Her very self; she gave it me last night. Here it is,” replied
d’Artagnan, taking it from his finger.

Athos examined it and became very pale. He tried it on his left hand; it
fit his finger as if made for it.

A shade of anger and vengeance passed across the usually calm brow of
this gentleman.

“It is impossible it can be she,” said he. “How could this ring come
into the hands of Milady Clarik? And yet it is difficult to suppose such
a resemblance should exist between two jewels.”

“Do you know this ring?” said d’Artagnan.

“I thought I did,” replied Athos; “but no doubt I was mistaken.” And he
returned d’Artagnan the ring without, however, ceasing to look at it.

“Pray, d’Artagnan,” said Athos, after a minute, “either take off that
ring or turn the mounting inside; it recalls such cruel recollections
that I shall have no head to converse with you. Don’t ask me for
counsel; don’t tell me you are perplexed what to do. But stop! let me
look at that sapphire again; the one I mentioned to you had one of its
faces scratched by accident.”

D’Artagnan took off the ring, giving it again to Athos.

Athos started. “Look,” said he, “is it not strange?” and he pointed out
to d’Artagnan the scratch he had remembered.

“But from whom did this ring come to you, Athos?”

“From my mother, who inherited it from her mother. As I told you, it is
an old family jewel.”

“And you--sold it?” asked d’Artagnan, hesitatingly.

“No,” replied Athos, with a singular smile. “I gave it away in a night
of love, as it has been given to you.”

D’Artagnan became pensive in his turn; it appeared as if there were
abysses in Milady’s soul whose depths were dark and unknown. He took
back the ring, but put it in his pocket and not on his finger.

“d’Artagnan,” said Athos, taking his hand, “you know I love you; if I
had a son I could not love him better. Take my advice, renounce this
woman. I do not know her, but a sort of intuition tells me she is a lost
creature, and that there is something fatal about her.”

“You are right,” said d’Artagnan; “I will have done with her. I own that
this woman terrifies me.”

“Shall you have the courage?” said Athos.

“I shall,” replied d’Artagnan, “and instantly.”

“In truth, my young friend, you will act rightly,” said the gentleman,
pressing the Gascon’s hand with an affection almost paternal; “and God
grant that this woman, who has scarcely entered into your life, may not
leave a terrible trace in it!” And Athos bowed to d’Artagnan like a man
who wishes it understood that he would not be sorry to be left alone
with his thoughts.

On reaching home d’Artagnan found Kitty waiting for him. A month of
fever could not have changed her more than this one night of
sleeplessness and sorrow.

She was sent by her mistress to the false de Wardes. Her mistress was
mad with love, intoxicated with joy. She wished to know when her lover
would meet her a second night; and poor Kitty, pale and trembling,
awaited d’Artagnan’s reply. The counsels of his friend, joined to the
cries of his own heart, made him determine, now his pride was saved and
his vengeance satisfied, not to see Milady again. As a reply, he wrote
the following letter:

Do not depend upon me, madame, for the next meeting. Since my
convalescence I have so many affairs of this kind on my hands that I am
forced to regulate them a little. When your turn comes, I shall have the
honor to inform you of it. I kiss your hands.

Comte de Wardes

Not a word about the sapphire. Was the Gascon determined to keep it as a
weapon against Milady, or else, let us be frank, did he not reserve the
sapphire as a last resource for his outfit? It would be wrong to judge
the actions of one period from the point of view of another. That which
would now be considered as disgraceful to a gentleman was at that time
quite a simple and natural affair, and the younger sons of the best
families were frequently supported by their mistresses. D’Artagnan gave
the open letter to Kitty, who at first was unable to comprehend it, but
who became almost wild with joy on reading it a second time. She could
scarcely believe in her happiness; and d’Artagnan was forced to renew
with the living voice the assurances which he had written. And whatever
might be--considering the violent character of Milady--the danger which
the poor girl incurred in giving this billet to her mistress, she ran
back to the Place Royale as fast as her legs could carry her.

The heart of the best woman is pitiless toward the sorrows of a rival.

Milady opened the letter with eagerness equal to Kitty’s in bringing it;
but at the first words she read she became livid. She crushed the paper
in her hand, and turning with flashing eyes upon Kitty, she cried, “What
is this letter?”

“The answer to Madame’s,” replied Kitty, all in a tremble.

“Impossible!” cried Milady. “It is impossible a gentleman could have
written such a letter to a woman.” Then all at once, starting, she
cried, “My God! can he have--” and she stopped. She ground her teeth;
she was of the color of ashes. She tried to go toward the window for
air, but she could only stretch forth her arms; her legs failed her, and
she sank into an armchair. Kitty, fearing she was ill, hastened toward
her and was beginning to open her dress; but Milady started up, pushing
her away. “What do you want with me?” said she, “and why do you place
your hand on me?”

“I thought that Madame was ill, and I wished to bring her help,”
responded the maid, frightened at the terrible expression which had come
over her mistress’s face.

“I faint? I? I? Do you take me for half a woman? When I am insulted I do
not faint; I avenge myself!”

And she made a sign for Kitty to leave the room.




36 DREAM OF VENGEANCE


That evening Milady gave orders that when M. d’Artagnan came as usual,
he should be immediately admitted; but he did not come.

The next day Kitty went to see the young man again, and related to him
all that had passed on the preceding evening. D’Artagnan smiled; this
jealous anger of Milady was his revenge.

That evening Milady was still more impatient than on the preceding
evening. She renewed the order relative to the Gascon; but as before she
expected him in vain.

The next morning, when Kitty presented herself at d’Artagnan’s, she was
no longer joyous and alert as on the two preceding days; but on the
contrary sad as death.

D’Artagnan asked the poor girl what was the matter with her; but she, as
her only reply, drew a letter from her pocket and gave it to him.

This letter was in Milady’s handwriting; only this time it was addressed
to M. d’Artagnan, and not to M. de Wardes.

He opened it and read as follows:

Dear M. d’Artagnan, It is wrong thus to neglect your friends,
particularly at the moment you are about to leave them for so long a
time. My brother-in-law and myself expected you yesterday and the day
before, but in vain. Will it be the same this evening?

Your very grateful, Milady Clarik

“That’s all very simple,” said d’Artagnan; “I expected this letter. My
credit rises by the fall of that of the Comte de Wardes.”

“And will you go?” asked Kitty.

“Listen to me, my dear girl,” said the Gascon, who sought for an excuse
in his own eyes for breaking the promise he had made Athos; “you must
understand it would be impolitic not to accept such a positive
invitation. Milady, not seeing me come again, would not be able to
understand what could cause the interruption of my visits, and might
suspect something; who could say how far the vengeance of such a woman
would go?”

“Oh, my God!” said Kitty, “you know how to represent things in such a
way that you are always in the right. You are going now to pay your
court to her again, and if this time you succeed in pleasing her in your
own name and with your own face, it will be much worse than before.”

Instinct made poor Kitty guess a part of what was to happen. D’Artagnan
reassured her as well as he could, and promised to remain insensible to
the seductions of Milady.

He desired Kitty to tell her mistress that he could not be more grateful
for her kindnesses than he was, and that he would be obedient to her
orders. He did not dare to write for fear of not being able--to such
experienced eyes as those of Milady--to disguise his writing
sufficiently.

As nine o’clock sounded, d’Artagnan was at the Place Royale. It was
evident that the servants who waited in the antechamber were warned, for
as soon as d’Artagnan appeared, before even he had asked if Milady were
visible, one of them ran to announce him.

“Show him in,” said Milady, in a quick tone, but so piercing that
d’Artagnan heard her in the antechamber.

He was introduced.

“I am at home to nobody,” said Milady; “observe, to nobody.” The servant
went out.

D’Artagnan cast an inquiring glance at Milady. She was pale, and looked
fatigued, either from tears or want of sleep. The number of lights had
been intentionally diminished, but the young woman could not conceal the
traces of the fever which had devoured her for two days.

D’Artagnan approached her with his usual gallantry. She then made an
extraordinary effort to receive him, but never did a more distressed
countenance give the lie to a more amiable smile.

To the questions which d’Artagnan put concerning her health, she
replied, “Bad, very bad.”

“Then,” replied he, “my visit is ill-timed; you, no doubt, stand in need
of repose, and I will withdraw.”

“No, no!” said Milady. “On the contrary, stay, Monsieur d’Artagnan; your
agreeable company will divert me.”

“Oh, oh!” thought d’Artagnan. “She has never been so kind before. On
guard!”

Milady assumed the most agreeable air possible, and conversed with more
than her usual brilliancy. At the same time the fever, which for an
instant abandoned her, returned to give luster to her eyes, color to her
cheeks, and vermillion to her lips. D’Artagnan was again in the presence
of the Circe who had before surrounded him with her enchantments. His
love, which he believed to be extinct but which was only asleep, awoke
again in his heart. Milady smiled, and d’Artagnan felt that he could
damn himself for that smile. There was a moment at which he felt
something like remorse.

By degrees, Milady became more communicative. She asked d’Artagnan if he
had a mistress.

“Alas!” said d’Artagnan, with the most sentimental air he could assume,
“can you be cruel enough to put such a question to me--to me, who, from
the moment I saw you, have only breathed and sighed through you and for
you?”

Milady smiled with a strange smile.

“Then you love me?” said she.

“Have I any need to tell you so? Have you not perceived it?”

“It may be; but you know the more hearts are worth the capture, the more
difficult they are to be won.”

“Oh, difficulties do not affright me,” said d’Artagnan. “I shrink before
nothing but impossibilities.”

“Nothing is impossible,” replied Milady, “to true love.”

“Nothing, madame?”

“Nothing,” replied Milady.

“The devil!” thought d’Artagnan. “The note is changed. Is she going to
fall in love with me, by chance, this fair inconstant; and will she be
disposed to give me myself another sapphire like that which she gave me
for de Wardes?”

D’Artagnan rapidly drew his seat nearer to Milady’s.

“Well, now,” she said, “let us see what you would do to prove this love
of which you speak.”

“All that could be required of me. Order; I am ready.”

“For everything?”

“For everything,” cried d’Artagnan, who knew beforehand that he had not
much to risk in engaging himself thus.

“Well, now let us talk a little seriously,” said Milady, in her turn
drawing her armchair nearer to d’Artagnan’s chair.

“I am all attention, madame,” said he.

Milady remained thoughtful and undecided for a moment; then, as if
appearing to have formed a resolution, she said, “I have an enemy.”

“You, madame!” said d’Artagnan, affecting surprise; “is that possible,
my God?--good and beautiful as you are!”

“A mortal enemy.”

“Indeed!”

“An enemy who has insulted me so cruelly that between him and me it is
war to the death. May I reckon on you as an auxiliary?”

D’Artagnan at once perceived the ground which the vindictive creature
wished to reach.

“You may, madame,” said he, with emphasis. “My arm and my life belong to
you, like my love.”

“Then,” said Milady, “since you are as generous as you are loving--”

She stopped.

“Well?” demanded d’Artagnan.

“Well,” replied Milady, after a moment of silence, “from the present
time, cease to talk of impossibilities.”

“Do not overwhelm me with happiness,” cried d’Artagnan, throwing himself
on his knees, and covering with kisses the hands abandoned to him.

“Avenge me of that infamous de Wardes,” said Milady, between her teeth,
“and I shall soon know how to get rid of you--you double idiot, you
animated sword blade!”

“Fall voluntarily into my arms, hypocritical and dangerous woman,” said
d’Artagnan, likewise to himself, “after having abused me with such
effrontery, and afterward I will laugh at you with him whom you wish me
to kill.”

D’Artagnan lifted up his head.

“I am ready,” said he.

“You have understood me, then, dear Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Milady.

“I could interpret one of your looks.”

“Then you would employ for me your arm which has already acquired so
much renown?”

“Instantly!”

“But on my part,” said Milady, “how should I repay such a service? I
know these lovers. They are men who do nothing for nothing.”

“You know the only reply that I desire,” said d’Artagnan, “the only one
worthy of you and of me!”

And he drew nearer to her.

She scarcely resisted.

“Interested man!” cried she, smiling.

“Ah,” cried d’Artagnan, really carried away by the passion this woman
had the power to kindle in his heart, “ah, that is because my happiness
appears so impossible to me; and I have such fear that it should fly
away from me like a dream that I pant to make a reality of it.”

“Well, merit this pretended happiness, then!”

“I am at your orders,” said d’Artagnan.

“Quite certain?” said Milady, with a last doubt.

“Only name to me the base man that has brought tears into your beautiful
eyes!”

“Who told you that I had been weeping?” said she.

“It appeared to me--”

“Such women as I never weep,” said Milady.

“So much the better! Come, tell me his name!”

“Remember that his name is all my secret.”

“Yet I must know his name.”

“Yes, you must; see what confidence I have in you!”

“You overwhelm me with joy. What is his name?”

“You know him.”

“Indeed.”

“Yes.”

“It is surely not one of my friends?” replied d’Artagnan, affecting
hesitation in order to make her believe him ignorant.

“If it were one of your friends you would hesitate, then?” cried Milady;
and a threatening glance darted from her eyes.

“Not if it were my own brother!” cried d’Artagnan, as if carried away by
his enthusiasm.

Our Gascon promised this without risk, for he knew all that was meant.

“I love your devotedness,” said Milady.

“Alas, do you love nothing else in me?” asked d’Artagnan.

“I love you also, YOU!” said she, taking his hand.

The warm pressure made d’Artagnan tremble, as if by the touch that fever
which consumed Milady attacked himself.

“You love me, you!” cried he. “Oh, if that were so, I should lose my
reason!”

And he folded her in his arms. She made no effort to remove her lips
from his kisses; only she did not respond to them. Her lips were cold;
it appeared to d’Artagnan that he had embraced a statue.

He was not the less intoxicated with joy, electrified by love. He almost
believed in the tenderness of Milady; he almost believed in the crime of
de Wardes. If de Wardes had at that moment been under his hand, he would
have killed him.

Milady seized the occasion.

“His name is--” said she, in her turn.

“De Wardes; I know it,” cried d’Artagnan.

“And how do you know it?” asked Milady, seizing both his hands, and
endeavoring to read with her eyes to the bottom of his heart.

D’Artagnan felt he had allowed himself to be carried away, and that he
had committed an error.

“Tell me, tell me, tell me, I say,” repeated Milady, “how do you know
it?”

“How do I know it?” said d’Artagnan.

“Yes.”

“I know it because yesterday Monsieur de Wardes, in a saloon where I
was, showed a ring which he said he had received from you.”

“Wretch!” cried Milady.

The epithet, as may be easily understood, resounded to the very bottom
of d’Artagnan’s heart.

“Well?” continued she.

“Well, I will avenge you of this wretch,” replied d’Artagnan, giving
himself the airs of Don Japhet of Armenia.

“Thanks, my brave friend!” cried Milady; “and when shall I be avenged?”

“Tomorrow--immediately--when you please!”

Milady was about to cry out, “Immediately,” but she reflected that such
precipitation would not be very gracious toward d’Artagnan.

Besides, she had a thousand precautions to take, a thousand counsels to
give to her defender, in order that he might avoid explanations with the
count before witnesses. All this was answered by an expression of
d’Artagnan’s. “Tomorrow,” said he, “you will be avenged, or I shall be
dead.”

“No,” said she, “you will avenge me; but you will not be dead. He is a
coward.”

“With women, perhaps; but not with men. I know something of him.”

“But it seems you had not much reason to complain of your fortune in
your contest with him.”

“Fortune is a courtesan; favorable yesterday, she may turn her back
tomorrow.”

“Which means that you now hesitate?”

“No, I do not hesitate; God forbid! But would it be just to allow me to
go to a possible death without having given me at least something more
than hope?”

Milady answered by a glance which said, “Is that all?--speak, then.” And
then accompanying the glance with explanatory words, “That is but too
just,” said she, tenderly.

“Oh, you are an angel!” exclaimed the young man.

“Then all is agreed?” said she.

“Except that which I ask of you, dear love.”

“But when I assure you that you may rely on my tenderness?”

“I cannot wait till tomorrow.”

“Silence! I hear my brother. It will be useless for him to find you
here.”

She rang the bell and Kitty appeared.

“Go out this way,” said she, opening a small private door, “and come
back at eleven o’clock; we will then terminate this conversation. Kitty
will conduct you to my chamber.”

The poor girl almost fainted at hearing these words.

“Well, mademoiselle, what are you thinking about, standing there like a
statue? Do as I bid you: show the chevalier out; and this evening at
eleven o’clock--you have heard what I said.”

“It appears that these appointments are all made for eleven o’clock,”
thought d’Artagnan; “that’s a settled custom.”

Milady held out her hand to him, which he kissed tenderly.

“But,” said he, as he retired as quickly as possible from the reproaches
of Kitty, “I must not play the fool. This woman is certainly a great
liar. I must take care.”




37 MILADY’S SECRET


D’Artagnan left the hotel instead of going up at once to Kitty’s
chamber, as she endeavored to persuade him to do--and that for two
reasons: the first, because by this means he should escape reproaches,
recriminations, and prayers; the second, because he was not sorry to
have an opportunity of reading his own thoughts and endeavoring, if
possible, to fathom those of this woman.

What was most clear in the matter was that d’Artagnan loved Milady like
a madman, and that she did not love him at all. In an instant d’Artagnan
perceived that the best way in which he could act would be to go home
and write Milady a long letter, in which he would confess to her that he
and de Wardes were, up to the present moment absolutely the same, and
that consequently he could not undertake, without committing suicide, to
kill the Comte de Wardes. But he also was spurred on by a ferocious
desire of vengeance. He wished to subdue this woman in his own name; and
as this vengeance appeared to him to have a certain sweetness in it, he
could not make up his mind to renounce it.

He walked six or seven times round the Place Royale, turning at every
ten steps to look at the light in Milady’s apartment, which was to be
seen through the blinds. It was evident that this time the young woman
was not in such haste to retire to her apartment as she had been the
first.

At length the light disappeared. With this light was extinguished the
last irresolution in the heart of d’Artagnan. He recalled to his mind
the details of the first night, and with a beating heart and a brain on
fire he re-entered the hotel and flew toward Kitty’s chamber.

The poor girl, pale as death and trembling in all her limbs, wished to
delay her lover; but Milady, with her ear on the watch, had heard the
noise d’Artagnan had made, and opening the door, said, “Come in.”

All this was of such incredible immodesty, of such monstrous effrontery,
that d’Artagnan could scarcely believe what he saw or what he heard. He
imagined himself to be drawn into one of those fantastic intrigues one
meets in dreams. He, however, darted not the less quickly toward Milady,
yielding to that magnetic attraction which the loadstone exercises over
iron.

As the door closed after them Kitty rushed toward it. Jealousy, fury,
offended pride, all the passions in short that dispute the heart of an
outraged woman in love, urged her to make a revelation; but she
reflected that she would be totally lost if she confessed having
assisted in such a machination, and above all, that d’Artagnan would
also be lost to her forever. This last thought of love counseled her to
make this last sacrifice.

D’Artagnan, on his part, had gained the summit of all his wishes. It was
no longer a rival who was beloved; it was himself who was apparently
beloved. A secret voice whispered to him, at the bottom of his heart,
that he was but an instrument of vengeance, that he was only caressed
till he had given death; but pride, but self-love, but madness silenced
this voice and stifled its murmurs. And then our Gascon, with that large
quantity of conceit which we know he possessed, compared himself with de
Wardes, and asked himself why, after all, he should not be beloved for
himself?

He was absorbed entirely by the sensations of the moment. Milady was no
longer for him that woman of fatal intentions who had for a moment
terrified him; she was an ardent, passionate mistress, abandoning
herself to love which she also seemed to feel. Two hours thus glided
away. When the transports of the two lovers were calmer, Milady, who had
not the same motives for forgetfulness that d’Artagnan had, was the
first to return to reality, and asked the young man if the means which
were on the morrow to bring on the encounter between him and de Wardes
were already arranged in his mind.

But d’Artagnan, whose ideas had taken quite another course, forgot
himself like a fool, and answered gallantly that it was too late to
think about duels and sword thrusts.

This coldness toward the only interests that occupied her mind terrified
Milady, whose questions became more pressing.

Then d’Artagnan, who had never seriously thought of this impossible
duel, endeavored to turn the conversation; but he could not succeed.
Milady kept him within the limits she had traced beforehand with her
irresistible spirit and her iron will.

D’Artagnan fancied himself very cunning when advising Milady to
renounce, by pardoning de Wardes, the furious projects she had formed.

But at the first word the young woman started, and exclaimed in a sharp,
bantering tone, which sounded strangely in the darkness, “Are you
afraid, dear Monsieur d’Artagnan?”

“You cannot think so, dear love!” replied d’Artagnan; “but now, suppose
this poor Comte de Wardes were less guilty than you think him?”

“At all events,” said Milady, seriously, “he has deceived me, and from
the moment he deceived me, he merited death.”

“He shall die, then, since you condemn him!” said d’Artagnan, in so firm
a tone that it appeared to Milady an undoubted proof of devotion. This
reassured her.

We cannot say how long the night seemed to Milady, but d’Artagnan
believed it to be hardly two hours before the daylight peeped through
the window blinds, and invaded the chamber with its paleness. Seeing
d’Artagnan about to leave her, Milady recalled his promise to avenge her
on the Comte de Wardes.

“I am quite ready,” said d’Artagnan; “but in the first place I should
like to be certain of one thing.”

“And what is that?” asked Milady.

“That is, whether you really love me?”

“I have given you proof of that, it seems to me.”

“And I am yours, body and soul!”

“Thanks, my brave lover; but as you are satisfied of my love, you must,
in your turn, satisfy me of yours. Is it not so?”

“Certainly; but if you love me as much as you say,” replied d’Artagnan,
“do you not entertain a little fear on my account?”

“What have I to fear?”

“Why, that I may be dangerously wounded--killed even.”

“Impossible!” cried Milady, “you are such a valiant man, and such an
expert swordsman.”

“You would not, then, prefer a method,” resumed d’Artagnan, “which would
equally avenge you while rendering the combat useless?”

Milady looked at her lover in silence. The pale light of the first rays
of day gave to her clear eyes a strangely frightful expression.

“Really,” said she, “I believe you now begin to hesitate.”

“No, I do not hesitate; but I really pity this poor Comte de Wardes,
since you have ceased to love him. I think that a man must be so
severely punished by the loss of your love that he stands in need of no
other chastisement.”

“Who told you that I loved him?” asked Milady, sharply.

“At least, I am now at liberty to believe, without too much fatuity,
that you love another,” said the young man, in a caressing tone, “and I
repeat that I am really interested for the count.”

“You?” asked Milady.

“Yes, I.”

“And why YOU?”

“Because I alone know--”

“What?”

“That he is far from being, or rather having been, so guilty toward you
as he appears.”

“Indeed!” said Milady, in an anxious tone; “explain yourself, for I
really cannot tell what you mean.”

And she looked at d’Artagnan, who embraced her tenderly, with eyes which
seemed to burn themselves away.

“Yes; I am a man of honor,” said d’Artagnan, determined to come to an
end, “and since your love is mine, and I am satisfied I possess it--for
I do possess it, do I not?”

“Entirely; go on.”

“Well, I feel as if transformed--a confession weighs on my mind.”

“A confession!”

“If I had the least doubt of your love I would not make it, but you love
me, my beautiful mistress, do you not?”

“Without doubt.”

“Then if through excess of love I have rendered myself culpable toward
you, you will pardon me?”

“Perhaps.”

D’Artagnan tried with his sweetest smile to touch his lips to Milady’s,
but she evaded him.

“This confession,” said she, growing paler, “what is this confession?”

“You gave de Wardes a meeting on Thursday last in this very room, did
you not?”

“No, no! It is not true,” said Milady, in a tone of voice so firm, and
with a countenance so unchanged, that if d’Artagnan had not been in such
perfect possession of the fact, he would have doubted.

“Do not lie, my angel,” said d’Artagnan, smiling; “that would be
useless.”

“What do you mean? Speak! you kill me.”

“Be satisfied; you are not guilty toward me, and I have already pardoned
you.”

“What next? what next?”

“De Wardes cannot boast of anything.”

“How is that? You told me yourself that that ring--”

“That ring I have! The Comte de Wardes of Thursday and the d’Artagnan of
today are the same person.”

The imprudent young man expected a surprise, mixed with shame--a slight
storm which would resolve itself into tears; but he was strangely
deceived, and his error was not of long duration.

Pale and trembling, Milady repulsed d’Artagnan’s attempted embrace by a
violent blow on the chest, as she sprang out of bed.

It was almost broad daylight.

D’Artagnan detained her by her night dress of fine India linen, to
implore her pardon; but she, with a strong movement, tried to escape.
Then the cambric was torn from her beautiful shoulders; and on one of
those lovely shoulders, round and white, d’Artagnan recognized, with
inexpressible astonishment, the FLEUR-DE-LIS--that indelible mark which
the hand of the infamous executioner had imprinted.

“Great God!” cried d’Artagnan, loosing his hold of her dress, and
remaining mute, motionless, and frozen.

But Milady felt herself denounced even by his terror. He had doubtless
seen all. The young man now knew her secret, her terrible secret--the
secret she concealed even from her maid with such care, the secret of
which all the world was ignorant, except himself.

She turned upon him, no longer like a furious woman, but like a wounded
panther.

“Ah, wretch!” cried she, “you have basely betrayed me, and still more,
you have my secret! You shall die.”

And she flew to a little inlaid casket which stood upon the dressing
table, opened it with a feverish and trembling hand, drew from it a
small poniard, with a golden haft and a sharp thin blade, and then threw
herself with a bound upon d’Artagnan.

Although the young man was brave, as we know, he was terrified at that
wild countenance, those terribly dilated pupils, those pale cheeks, and
those bleeding lips. He recoiled to the other side of the room as he
would have done from a serpent which was crawling toward him, and his
sword coming in contact with his nervous hand, he drew it almost
unconsciously from the scabbard. But without taking any heed of the
sword, Milady endeavored to get near enough to him to stab him, and did
not stop till she felt the sharp point at her throat.

She then tried to seize the sword with her hands; but d’Artagnan kept it
free from her grasp, and presenting the point, sometimes at her eyes,
sometimes at her breast, compelled her to glide behind the bedstead,
while he aimed at making his retreat by the door which led to Kitty’s
apartment.

Milady during this time continued to strike at him with horrible fury,
screaming in a formidable way.

As all this, however, bore some resemblance to a duel, d’Artagnan began
to recover himself little by little.

“Well, beautiful lady, very well,” said he; “but, PARDIEU, if you don’t
calm yourself, I will design a second FLEUR-DE-LIS upon one of those
pretty cheeks!”

“Scoundrel, infamous scoundrel!” howled Milady.

But d’Artagnan, still keeping on the defensive, drew near to Kitty’s
door. At the noise they made, she in overturning the furniture in her
efforts to get at him, he in screening himself behind the furniture to
keep out of her reach, Kitty opened the door. D’Artagnan, who had
unceasingly maneuvered to gain this point, was not at more than three
paces from it. With one spring he flew from the chamber of Milady into
that of the maid, and quick as lightning, he slammed to the door, and
placed all his weight against it, while Kitty pushed the bolts.

Then Milady attempted to tear down the doorcase, with a strength
apparently above that of a woman; but finding she could not accomplish
this, she in her fury stabbed at the door with her poniard, the point of
which repeatedly glittered through the wood. Every blow was accompanied
with terrible imprecations.

“Quick, Kitty, quick!” said d’Artagnan, in a low voice, as soon as the
bolts were fast, “let me get out of the hotel; for if we leave her time
to turn round, she will have me killed by the servants.”

“But you can’t go out so,” said Kitty; “you are naked.”

“That’s true,” said d’Artagnan, then first thinking of the costume he
found himself in, “that’s true. But dress me as well as you are able,
only make haste; think, my dear girl, it’s life and death!”

Kitty was but too well aware of that. In a turn of the hand she muffled
him up in a flowered robe, a large hood, and a cloak. She gave him some
slippers, in which he placed his naked feet, and then conducted him down
the stairs. It was time. Milady had already rung her bell, and roused
the whole hotel. The porter was drawing the cord at the moment Milady
cried from her window, “Don’t open!”

The young man fled while she was still threatening him with an impotent
gesture. The moment she lost sight of him, Milady tumbled fainting into
her chamber.




38 HOW, WITHOUT INCOMMDING HIMSELF, ATHOS PROCURES HIS EQUIPMENT


D’Artagnan was so completely bewildered that without taking any heed of
what might become of Kitty he ran at full speed across half Paris, and
did not stop till he came to Athos’s door. The confusion of his mind,
the terror which spurred him on, the cries of some of the patrol who
started in pursuit of him, and the hooting of the people who,
notwithstanding the early hour, were going to their work, only made him
precipitate his course.

He crossed the court, ran up the two flights to Athos’s apartment, and
knocked at the door enough to break it down.

Grimaud came, rubbing his half-open eyes, to answer this noisy summons,
and d’Artagnan sprang with such violence into the room as nearly to
overturn the astonished lackey.

In spite of his habitual silence, the poor lad this time found his
speech.

“Holloa, there!” cried he; “what do you want, you strumpet? What’s your
business here, you hussy?”

D’Artagnan threw off his hood, and disengaged his hands from the folds
of the cloak. At sight of the mustaches and the naked sword, the poor
devil perceived he had to deal with a man. He then concluded it must be
an assassin.

“Help! murder! help!” cried he.

“Hold your tongue, you stupid fellow!” said the young man; “I am
d’Artagnan; don’t you know me? Where is your master?”

“You, Monsieur d’Artagnan!” cried Grimaud, “impossible.”

“Grimaud,” said Athos, coming out of his apartment in a dressing gown,
“Grimaud, I thought I heard you permitting yourself to speak?”

“Ah, monsieur, it is--”

“Silence!”

Grimaud contented himself with pointing d’Artagnan out to his master
with his finger.

Athos recognized his comrade, and phlegmatic as he was, he burst into a
laugh which was quite excused by the strange masquerade before his
eyes--petticoats falling over his shoes, sleeves tucked up, and
mustaches stiff with agitation.

“Don’t laugh, my friend!” cried d’Artagnan; “for heaven’s sake, don’t
laugh, for upon my soul, it’s no laughing matter!”

And he pronounced these words with such a solemn air and with such a
real appearance of terror, that Athos eagerly seized his hand, crying,
“Are you wounded, my friend? How pale you are!”

“No, but I have just met with a terrible adventure! Are you alone,
Athos?”

“PARBLEU! whom do you expect to find with me at this hour?”

“Well, well!” and d’Artagnan rushed into Athos’s chamber.

“Come, speak!” said the latter, closing the door and bolting it, that
they might not be disturbed. “Is the king dead? Have you killed the
cardinal? You are quite upset! Come, come, tell me; I am dying with
curiosity and uneasiness!”

“Athos,” said d’Artagnan, getting rid of his female garments, and
appearing in his shirt, “prepare yourself to hear an incredible, an
unheard-of story.”

“Well, but put on this dressing gown first,” said the Musketeer to his
friend.

D’Artagnan donned the robe as quickly as he could, mistaking one sleeve
for the other, so greatly was he still agitated.

“Well?” said Athos.

“Well,” replied d’Artagnan, bending his mouth to Athos’s ear, and
lowering his voice, “Milady is marked with a FLEUR-DE-LIS upon her
shoulder!”

“Ah!” cried the Musketeer, as if he had received a ball in his heart.

“Let us see,” said d’Artagnan. “Are you SURE that the OTHER is dead?”

“THE OTHER?” said Athos, in so stifled a voice that d’Artagnan scarcely
heard him.

“Yes, she of whom you told me one day at Amiens.”

Athos uttered a groan, and let his head sink on his hands.

“This is a woman of twenty-six or twenty-eight years.”

“Fair,” said Athos, “is she not?”

“Very.”

“Blue and clear eyes, of a strange brilliancy, with black eyelids and
eyebrows?”

“Yes.”

“Tall, well-made? She has lost a tooth, next to the eyetooth on the
left?”

“Yes.”

“The FLEUR-DE-LIS is small, rosy in color, and looks as if efforts had
been made to efface it by the application of poultices?”

“Yes.”

“But you say she is English?”

“She is called Milady, but she may be French. Lord de Winter is only her
brother-in-law.”

“I will see her, d’Artagnan!”

“Beware, Athos, beware. You tried to kill her; she is a woman to return
you the like, and not to fail.”

“She will not dare to say anything; that would be to denounce herself.”

“She is capable of anything or everything. Did you ever see her
furious?”

“No,” said Athos.

“A tigress, a panther! Ah, my dear Athos, I am greatly afraid I have
drawn a terrible vengeance on both of us!”

D’Artagnan then related all--the mad passion of Milady and her menaces
of death.

“You are right; and upon my soul, I would give my life for a hair,” said
Athos. “Fortunately, the day after tomorrow we leave Paris. We are going
according to all probability to La Rochelle, and once gone--”

“She will follow you to the end of the world, Athos, if she recognizes
you. Let her, then, exhaust her vengeance on me alone!”

“My dear friend, of what consequence is it if she kills me?” said Athos.
“Do you, perchance, think I set any great store by life?”

“There is something horribly mysterious under all this, Athos; this
woman is one of the cardinal’s spies, I am sure of that.”

“In that case, take care! If the cardinal does not hold you in high
admiration for the affair of London, he entertains a great hatred for
you; but as, considering everything, he cannot accuse you openly, and as
hatred must be satisfied, particularly when it’s a cardinal’s hatred,
take care of yourself. If you go out, do not go out alone; when you eat,
use every precaution. Mistrust everything, in short, even your own
shadow.”

“Fortunately,” said d’Artagnan, “all this will be only necessary till
after tomorrow evening, for when once with the army, we shall have, I
hope, only men to dread.”

“In the meantime,” said Athos, “I renounce my plan of seclusion, and
wherever you go, I will go with you. You must return to the Rue des
Fossoyeurs; I will accompany you.”

“But however near it may be,” replied d’Artagnan, “I cannot go thither
in this guise.”

“That’s true,” said Athos, and he rang the bell.

Grimaud entered.

Athos made him a sign to go to d’Artagnan’s residence, and bring back
some clothes. Grimaud replied by another sign that he understood
perfectly, and set off.

“All this will not advance your outfit,” said Athos; “for if I am not
mistaken, you have left the best of your apparel with Milady, and she
will certainly not have the politeness to return it to you. Fortunately,
you have the sapphire.”

“The jewel is yours, my dear Athos! Did you not tell me it was a family
jewel?”

“Yes, my grandfather gave two thousand crowns for it, as he once told
me. It formed part of the nuptial present he made his wife, and it is
magnificent. My mother gave it to me, and I, fool as I was, instead of
keeping the ring as a holy relic, gave it to this wretch.”

“Then, my friend, take back this ring, to which I see you attach much
value.”

“I take back the ring, after it has passed through the hands of that
infamous creature? Never; that ring is defiled, d’Artagnan.”

“Sell it, then.”

“Sell a jewel which came from my mother! I vow I should consider it a
profanation.”

“Pledge it, then; you can borrow at least a thousand crowns on it. With
that sum you can extricate yourself from your present difficulties; and
when you are full of money again, you can redeem it, and take it back
cleansed from its ancient stains, as it will have passed through the
hands of usurers.”

Athos smiled.

“You are a capital companion, d’Artagnan,” said be; “your never-failing
cheerfulness raises poor souls in affliction. Well, let us pledge the
ring, but upon one condition.”

“What?”

“That there shall be five hundred crowns for you, and five hundred
crowns for me.”

“Don’t dream it, Athos. I don’t need the quarter of such a sum--I who am
still only in the Guards--and by selling my saddles, I shall procure it.
What do I want? A horse for Planchet, that’s all. Besides, you forget
that I have a ring likewise.”

“To which you attach more value, it seems, than I do to mine; at least,
I have thought so.”

“Yes, for in any extreme circumstance it might not only extricate us
from some great embarrassment, but even a great danger. It is not only a
valuable diamond, but it is an enchanted talisman.”

“I don’t at all understand you, but I believe all you say to be true.
Let us return to my ring, or rather to yours. You shall take half the
sum that will be advanced upon it, or I will throw it into the Seine;
and I doubt, as was the case with Polycrates, whether any fish will be
sufficiently complaisant to bring it back to us.”

“Well, I will take it, then,” said d’Artagnan.

At this moment Grimaud returned, accompanied by Planchet; the latter,
anxious about his master and curious to know what had happened to him,
had taken advantage of the opportunity and brought the garments himself.

d’Artagnan dressed himself, and Athos did the same. When the two were
ready to go out, the latter made Grimaud the sign of a man taking aim,
and the lackey immediately took down his musketoon, and prepared to
follow his master.

They arrived without accident at the Rue des Fossoyeurs. Bonacieux was
standing at the door, and looked at d’Artagnan hatefully.

“Make haste, dear lodger,” said he; “there is a very pretty girl waiting
for you upstairs; and you know women don’t like to be kept waiting.”

“That’s Kitty!” said d’Artagnan to himself, and darted into the passage.

Sure enough! Upon the landing leading to the chamber, and crouching
against the door, he found the poor girl, all in a tremble. As soon as
she perceived him, she cried, “You have promised your protection; you
have promised to save me from her anger. Remember, it is you who have
ruined me!”

“Yes, yes, to be sure, Kitty,” said d’Artagnan; “be at ease, my girl.
But what happened after my departure?”

“How can I tell!” said Kitty. “The lackeys were brought by the cries she
made. She was mad with passion. There exist no imprecations she did not
pour out against you. Then I thought she would remember it was through
my chamber you had penetrated hers, and that then she would suppose I
was your accomplice; so I took what little money I had and the best of
my things, and I got away.

“Poor dear girl! But what can I do with you? I am going away the day
after tomorrow.”

“Do what you please, Monsieur Chevalier. Help me out of Paris; help me
out of France!”

“I cannot take you, however, to the siege of La Rochelle,” aid
d’Artagnan.

“No; but you can place me in one of the provinces with some lady of your
acquaintance--in your own country, for instance.”

“My dear little love! In my country the ladies do without chambermaids.
But stop! I can manage your business for you. Planchet, go and find
Aramis. Request him to come here directly. We have something very
important to say to him.”

“I understand,” said Athos; “but why not Porthos? I should have thought
that his duchess--”

“Oh, Porthos’s duchess is dressed by her husband’s clerks,” said
d’Artagnan, laughing. “Besides, Kitty would not like to live in the Rue
aux Ours. Isn’t it so, Kitty?”

“I do not care where I live,” said Kitty, “provided I am well concealed,
and nobody knows where I am.”

“Meanwhile, Kitty, when we are about to separate, and you are no longer
jealous of me--”

“Monsieur Chevalier, far off or near,” said Kitty, “I shall always love
you.”

“Where the devil will constancy niche itself next?” murmured Athos.

“And I, also,” said d’Artagnan, “I also. I shall always love you; be
sure of that. But now answer me. I attach great importance to the
question I am about to put to you. Did you never hear talk of a young
woman who was carried off one night?”

“There, now! Oh, Monsieur Chevalier, do you love that woman still?”

“No, no; it is one of my friends who loves her--Monsieur Athos, this
gentleman here.”

“I?” cried Athos, with an accent like that of a man who perceives he is
about to tread upon an adder.

“You, to be sure!” said d’Artagnan, pressing Athos’s hand. “You know the
interest we both take in this poor little Madame Bonacieux. Besides,
Kitty will tell nothing; will you, Kitty? You understand, my dear girl,”
continued d’Artagnan, “she is the wife of that frightful baboon you saw
at the door as you came in.”

“Oh, my God! You remind me of my fright! If he should have known me
again!”

“How? know you again? Did you ever see that man before?”

“He came twice to Milady’s.”

“That’s it. About what time?”

“Why, about fifteen or eighteen days ago.”

“Exactly so.”

“And yesterday evening he came again.”

“Yesterday evening?”

“Yes, just before you came.”

“My dear Athos, we are enveloped in a network of spies. And do you
believe he knew you again, Kitty?”

“I pulled down my hood as soon as I saw him, but perhaps it was too
late.”

“Go down, Athos--he mistrusts you less than me--and see if he be still
at his door.”

Athos went down and returned immediately.

“He has gone,” said he, “and the house door is shut.”

“He has gone to make his report, and to say that all the pigeons are at
this moment in the dovecot.”

“Well, then, let us all fly,” said Athos, “and leave nobody here but
Planchet to bring us news.”

“A minute. Aramis, whom we have sent for!”

“That’s true,” said Athos; “we must wait for Aramis.”

At that moment Aramis entered.

The matter was all explained to him, and the friends gave him to
understand that among all his high connections he must find a place for
Kitty.

Aramis reflected for a minute, and then said, coloring, “Will it be
really rendering you a service, d’Artagnan?”

“I shall be grateful to you all my life.”

“Very well. Madame de Bois-Tracy asked me, for one of her friends who
resides in the provinces, I believe, for a trustworthy maid. If you can,
my dear d’Artagnan, answer for Mademoiselle-”

“Oh, monsieur, be assured that I shall be entirely devoted to the person
who will give me the means of quitting Paris.”

“Then,” said Aramis, “this falls out very well.”

He placed himself at the table and wrote a little note which he sealed
with a ring, and gave the billet to Kitty.

“And now, my dear girl,” said d’Artagnan, “you know that it is not good
for any of us to be here. Therefore let us separate. We shall meet again
in better days.”

“And whenever we find each other, in whatever place it may be,” said
Kitty, “you will find me loving you as I love you today.”

“Dicers’ oaths!” said Athos, while d’Artagnan went to conduct Kitty
downstairs.

An instant afterward the three young men separated, agreeing to meet
again at four o’clock with Athos, and leaving Planchet to guard the
house.

Aramis returned home, and Athos and d’Artagnan busied themselves about
pledging the sapphire.

As the Gascon had foreseen, they easily obtained three hundred pistoles
on the ring. Still further, the Jew told them that if they would sell it
to him, as it would make a magnificent pendant for earrings, he would
give five hundred pistoles for it.

Athos and d’Artagnan, with the activity of two soldiers and the
knowledge of two connoisseurs, hardly required three hours to purchase
the entire equipment of the Musketeer. Besides, Athos was very easy, and
a noble to his fingers’ ends. When a thing suited him he paid the price
demanded, without thinking to ask for any abatement. D’Artagnan would
have remonstrated at this; but Athos put his hand upon his shoulder,
with a smile, and d’Artagnan understood that it was all very well for
such a little Gascon gentleman as himself to drive a bargain, but not
for a man who had the bearing of a prince. The Musketeer met with a
superb Andalusian horse, black as jet, nostrils of fire, legs clean and
elegant, rising six years. He examined him, and found him sound and
without blemish. They asked a thousand livres for him.

He might perhaps have been bought for less; but while d’Artagnan was
discussing the price with the dealer, Athos was counting out the money
on the table.

Grimaud had a stout, short Picard cob, which cost three hundred livres.

But when the saddle and arms for Grimaud were purchased, Athos had not a
sou left of his hundred and fifty pistoles. D’Artagnan offered his
friend a part of his share which he should return when convenient.

But Athos only replied to this proposal by shrugging his shoulders.

“How much did the Jew say he would give for the sapphire if he purchased
it?” said Athos.

“Five hundred pistoles.”

“That is to say, two hundred more--a hundred pistoles for you and a
hundred pistoles for me. Well, now, that would be a real fortune to us,
my friend; let us go back to the Jew’s again.”

“What! will you--”

“This ring would certainly only recall very bitter remembrances; then we
shall never be masters of three hundred pistoles to redeem it, so that
we really should lose two hundred pistoles by the bargain. Go and tell
him the ring is his, d’Artagnan, and bring back the two hundred pistoles
with you.”

“Reflect, Athos!”

“Ready money is needful for the present time, and we must learn how to
make sacrifices. Go, d’Artagnan, go; Grimaud will accompany you with his
musketoon.”

A half hour afterward, d’Artagnan returned with the two thousand livres,
and without having met with any accident.

It was thus Athos found at home resources which he did not expect.




39 A VISION


At four o’clock the four friends were all assembled with Athos. Their
anxiety about their outfits had all disappeared, and each countenance
only preserved the expression of its own secret disquiet--for behind all
present happiness is concealed a fear for the future.

Suddenly Planchet entered, bringing two letters for d’Artagnan.

The one was a little billet, genteelly folded, with a pretty seal in
green wax on which was impressed a dove bearing a green branch.

The other was a large square epistle, resplendent with the terrible arms
of his Eminence the cardinal duke.

At the sight of the little letter the heart of d’Artagnan bounded, for
he believed he recognized the handwriting, and although he had seen that
writing but once, the memory of it remained at the bottom of his heart.

He therefore seized the little epistle, and opened it eagerly.

“Be,” said the letter, “on Thursday next, at from six to seven o’clock
in the evening, on the road to Chaillot, and look carefully into the
carriages that pass; but if you have any consideration for your own life
or that of those who love you, do not speak a single word, do not make a
movement which may lead anyone to believe you have recognized her who
exposes herself to everything for the sake of seeing you but for an
instant.”

No signature.

“That’s a snare,” said Athos; “don’t go, d’Artagnan.”

“And yet,” replied d’Artagnan, “I think I recognize the writing.”

“It may be counterfeit,” said Athos. “Between six and seven o’clock the
road of Chaillot is quite deserted; you might as well go and ride in the
forest of Bondy.”

“But suppose we all go,” said d’Artagnan; “what the devil! They won’t
devour us all four, four lackeys, horses, arms, and all!”

“And besides, it will be a chance for displaying our new equipments,”
said Porthos.

“But if it is a woman who writes,” said Aramis, “and that woman desires
not to be seen, remember, you compromise her, d’Artagnan; which is not
the part of a gentleman.”

“We will remain in the background,” said Porthos, “and he will advance
alone.”

“Yes; but a pistol shot is easily fired from a carriage which goes at a
gallop.”

“Bah!” said d’Artagnan, “they will miss me; if they fire we will ride
after the carriage, and exterminate those who may be in it. They must be
enemies.”

“He is right,” said Porthos; “battle. Besides, we must try our own
arms.”

“Bah, let us enjoy that pleasure,” said Aramis, with his mild and
careless manner.

“As you please,” said Athos.

“Gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, “it is half past four, and we have
scarcely time to be on the road of Chaillot by six.”

“Besides, if we go out too late, nobody will see us,” said Porthos, “and
that will be a pity. Let us get ready, gentlemen.”

“But this second letter,” said Athos, “you forget that; it appears to
me, however, that the seal denotes that it deserves to be opened. For my
part, I declare, d’Artagnan, I think it of much more consequence than
the little piece of waste paper you have so cunningly slipped into your
bosom.”

D’Artagnan blushed.

“Well,” said he, “let us see, gentlemen, what are his Eminence’s
commands,” and d’Artagnan unsealed the letter and read,

“M. d’Artagnan, of the king’s Guards, company Dessessart, is expected at
the Palais-Cardinal this evening, at eight o’clock.

“La Houdiniere, CAPTAIN OF THE GUARDS”

“The devil!” said Athos; “here’s a rendezvous much more serious than the
other.”

“I will go to the second after attending the first,” said d’Artagnan.
“One is for seven o’clock, and the other for eight; there will be time
for both.”

“Hum! I would not go at all,” said Aramis. “A gallant knight cannot
decline a rendezvous with a lady; but a prudent gentleman may excuse
himself from not waiting on his Eminence, particularly when he has
reason to believe he is not invited to make his compliments.”

“I am of Aramis’s opinion,” said Porthos.

“Gentlemen,” replied d’Artagnan, “I have already received by Monsieur de
Cavois a similar invitation from his Eminence. I neglected it, and on
the morrow a serious misfortune happened to me--Constance disappeared.
Whatever may ensue, I will go.”

“If you are determined,” said Athos, “do so.”

“But the Bastille?” said Aramis.

“Bah! you will get me out if they put me there,” said d’Artagnan.

“To be sure we will,” replied Aramis and Porthos, with admirable
promptness and decision, as if that were the simplest thing in the
world, “to be sure we will get you out; but meantime, as we are to set
off the day after tomorrow, you would do much better not to risk this
Bastille.”

“Let us do better than that,” said Athos; “do not let us leave him
during the whole evening. Let each of us wait at a gate of the palace
with three Musketeers behind him; if we see a close carriage, at all
suspicious in appearance, come out, let us fall upon it. It is a long
time since we have had a skirmish with the Guards of Monsieur the
Cardinal; Monsieur de Treville must think us dead.”

“To a certainty, Athos,” said Aramis, “you were meant to be a general of
the army! What do you think of the plan, gentlemen?”

“Admirable!” replied the young men in chorus.

“Well,” said Porthos, “I will run to the hotel, and engage our comrades
to hold themselves in readiness by eight o’clock; the rendezvous, the
Place du Palais-Cardinal. Meantime, you see that the lackeys saddle the
horses.”

“I have no horse,” said d’Artagnan; “but that is of no consequence, I
can take one of Monsieur de Treville’s.”

“That is not worth while,” said Aramis, “you can have one of mine.”

“One of yours! how many have you, then?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Three,” replied Aramis, smiling.

“Certes,” cried Athos, “you are the best-mounted poet of France or
Navarre.”

“Well, my dear Aramis, you don’t want three horses? I cannot comprehend
what induced you to buy three!”

“Therefore I only purchased two,” said Aramis.

“The third, then, fell from the clouds, I suppose?”

“No, the third was brought to me this very morning by a groom out of
livery, who would not tell me in whose service he was, and who said he
had received orders from his master.”

“Or his mistress,” interrupted d’Artagnan.

“That makes no difference,” said Aramis, coloring; “and who affirmed, as
I said, that he had received orders from his master or mistress to place
the horse in my stable, without informing me whence it came.”

“It is only to poets that such things happen,” said Athos, gravely.

“Well, in that case, we can manage famously,” said d’Artagnan; “which of
the two horses will you ride--that which you bought or the one that was
given to you?”

“That which was given to me, assuredly. You cannot for a moment imagine,
d’Artagnan, that I would commit such an offense toward--”

“The unknown giver,” interrupted d’Artagnan.

“Or the mysterious benefactress,” said Athos.

“The one you bought will then become useless to you?”

“Nearly so.”

“And you selected it yourself?”

“With the greatest care. The safety of the horseman, you know, depends
almost always upon the goodness of his horse.”

“Well, transfer it to me at the price it cost you?”

“I was going to make you the offer, my dear d’Artagnan, giving you all
the time necessary for repaying me such a trifle.”

“How much did it cost you?”

“Eight hundred livres.”

“Here are forty double pistoles, my dear friend,” said d’Artagnan,
taking the sum from his pocket; “I know that is the coin in which you
were paid for your poems.”

“You are rich, then?” said Aramis.

“Rich? Richest, my dear fellow!”

And d’Artagnan chinked the remainder of his pistoles in his pocket.

“Send your saddle, then, to the hotel of the Musketeers, and your horse
can be brought back with ours.”

“Very well; but it is already five o’clock, so make haste.”

A quarter of an hour afterward Porthos appeared at the end of the Rue
Ferou on a very handsome genet. Mousqueton followed him upon an Auvergne
horse, small but very handsome. Porthos was resplendent with joy and
pride.

At the same time, Aramis made his appearance at the other end of the
street upon a superb English charger. Bazin followed him upon a roan,
holding by the halter a vigorous Mecklenburg horse; this was
d’Artagnan’s mount.

The two Musketeers met at the gate. Athos and d’Artagnan watched their
approach from the window.

“The devil!” cried Aramis, “you have a magnificent horse there,
Porthos.”

“Yes,” replied Porthos, “it is the one that ought to have been sent to
me at first. A bad joke of the husband’s substituted the other; but the
husband has been punished since, and I have obtained full satisfaction.”

Planchet and Grimaud appeared in their turn, leading their masters’
steeds. D’Artagnan and Athos put themselves into saddle with their
companions, and all four set forward; Athos upon a horse he owed to a
woman, Aramis on a horse he owed to his mistress, Porthos on a horse he
owed to his procurator’s wife, and d’Artagnan on a horse he owed to his
good fortune--the best mistress possible.

The lackeys followed.

As Porthos had foreseen, the cavalcade produced a good effect; and if
Mme. Coquenard had met Porthos and seen what a superb appearance he made
upon his handsome Spanish genet, she would not have regretted the
bleeding she had inflicted upon the strongbox of her husband.

Near the Louvre the four friends met with M. de Treville, who was
returning from St. Germain; he stopped them to offer his compliments
upon their appointments, which in an instant drew round them a hundred
gapers.

D’Artagnan profited by the circumstance to speak to M. de Treville of
the letter with the great red seal and the cardinal’s arms. It is well
understood that he did not breathe a word about the other.

M de Treville approved of the resolution he had adopted, and assured him
that if on the morrow he did not appear, he himself would undertake to
find him, let him be where he might.

At this moment the clock of La Samaritaine struck six; the four friends
pleaded an engagement, and took leave of M. de Treville.

A short gallop brought them to the road of Chaillot; the day began to
decline, carriages were passing and repassing. D’Artagnan, keeping at
some distance from his friends, darted a scrutinizing glance into every
carriage that appeared, but saw no face with which he was acquainted.

At length, after waiting a quarter of an hour and just as twilight was
beginning to thicken, a carriage appeared, coming at a quick pace on the
road of Sevres. A presentiment instantly told d’Artagnan that this
carriage contained the person who had appointed the rendezvous; the
young man was himself astonished to find his heart beat so violently.
Almost instantly a female head was put out at the window, with two
fingers placed upon her mouth, either to enjoin silence or to send him a
kiss. D’Artagnan uttered a slight cry of joy; this woman, or rather this
apparition--for the carriage passed with the rapidity of a vision--was
Mme. Bonacieux.

By an involuntary movement and in spite of the injunction given,
d’Artagnan put his horse into a gallop, and in a few strides overtook
the carriage; but the window was hermetically closed, the vision had
disappeared.

D’Artagnan then remembered the injunction: “If you value your own life
or that of those who love you, remain motionless, and as if you had seen
nothing.”

He stopped, therefore, trembling not for himself but for the poor woman
who had evidently exposed herself to great danger by appointing this
rendezvous.

The carriage pursued its way, still going at a great pace, till it
dashed into Paris, and disappeared.

D’Artagnan remained fixed to the spot, astounded and not knowing what to
think. If it was Mme. Bonacieux and if she was returning to Paris, why
this fugitive rendezvous, why this simple exchange of a glance, why this
lost kiss? If, on the other side, it was not she--which was still quite
possible--for the little light that remained rendered a mistake
easy--might it not be the commencement of some plot against him through
the allurement of this woman, for whom his love was known?

His three companions joined him. All had plainly seen a woman’s head
appear at the window, but none of them, except Athos, knew Mme.
Bonacieux. The opinion of Athos was that it was indeed she; but less
preoccupied by that pretty face than d’Artagnan, he had fancied he saw a
second head, a man’s head, inside the carriage.

“If that be the case,” said d’Artagnan, “they are doubtless transporting
her from one prison to another. But what can they intend to do with the
poor creature, and how shall I ever meet her again?”

“Friend,” said Athos, gravely, “remember that it is the dead alone with
whom we are not likely to meet again on this earth. You know something
of that, as well as I do, I think. Now, if your mistress is not dead, if
it is she we have just seen, you will meet with her again some day or
other. And perhaps, my God!” added he, with that misanthropic tone which
was peculiar to him, “perhaps sooner than you wish.”

Half past seven had sounded. The carriage had been twenty minutes behind
the time appointed. D’Artagnan’s friends reminded him that he had a
visit to pay, but at the same time bade him observe that there was yet
time to retract.

But d’Artagnan was at the same time impetuous and curious. He had made
up his mind that he would go to the Palais-Cardinal, and that he would
learn what his Eminence had to say to him. Nothing could turn him from
his purpose.

They reached the Rue St. Honore, and in the Place du Palais-Cardinal
they found the twelve invited Musketeers, walking about in expectation
of their comrades. There only they explained to them the matter in hand.

D’Artagnan was well known among the honorable corps of the king’s
Musketeers, in which it was known he would one day take his place; he
was considered beforehand as a comrade. It resulted from these
antecedents that everyone entered heartily into the purpose for which
they met; besides, it would not be unlikely that they would have an
opportunity of playing either the cardinal or his people an ill turn,
and for such expeditions these worthy gentlemen were always ready.

Athos divided them into three groups, assumed the command of one, gave
the second to Aramis, and the third to Porthos; and then each group went
and took their watch near an entrance.

D’Artagnan, on his part, entered boldly at the principal gate.

Although he felt himself ably supported, the young man was not without a
little uneasiness as he ascended the great staircase, step by step. His
conduct toward Milady bore a strong resemblance to treachery, and he was
very suspicious of the political relations which existed between that
woman and the cardinal. Still further, de Wardes, whom he had treated so
ill, was one of the tools of his Eminence; and d’Artagnan knew that
while his Eminence was terrible to his enemies, he was strongly attached
to his friends.

“If de Wardes has related all our affair to the cardinal, which is not
to be doubted, and if he has recognized me, as is probable, I may
consider myself almost as a condemned man,” said d’Artagnan, shaking his
head. “But why has he waited till now? That’s all plain enough. Milady
has laid her complaints against me with that hypocritical grief which
renders her so interesting, and this last offense has made the cup
overflow.”

“Fortunately,” added he, “my good friends are down yonder, and they will
not allow me to be carried away without a struggle. Nevertheless,
Monsieur de Treville’s company of Musketeers alone cannot maintain a war
against the cardinal, who disposes of the forces of all France, and
before whom the queen is without power and the king without will.
D’Artagnan, my friend, you are brave, you are prudent, you have
excellent qualities; but the women will ruin you!”

He came to this melancholy conclusion as he entered the antechamber. He
placed his letter in the hands of the usher on duty, who led him into
the waiting room and passed on into the interior of the palace.

In this waiting room were five or six of the cardinals Guards, who
recognized d’Artagnan, and knowing that it was he who had wounded
Jussac, they looked upon him with a smile of singular meaning.

This smile appeared to d’Artagnan to be of bad augury. Only, as our
Gascon was not easily intimidated--or rather, thanks to a great pride
natural to the men of his country, he did not allow one easily to see
what was passing in his mind when that which was passing at all
resembled fear--he placed himself haughtily in front of Messieurs the
Guards, and waited with his hand on his hip, in an attitude by no means
deficient in majesty.

The usher returned and made a sign to d’Artagnan to follow him. It
appeared to the young man that the Guards, on seeing him depart,
chuckled among themselves.

He traversed a corridor, crossed a grand saloon, entered a library, and
found himself in the presence of a man seated at a desk and writing.

The usher introduced him, and retired without speaking a word.
D’Artagnan remained standing and examined this man.

D’Artagnan at first believed that he had to do with some judge examining
his papers; but he perceived that the man at the desk wrote, or rather
corrected, lines of unequal length, scanning the words on his fingers.
He saw then that he was with a poet. At the end of an instant the poet
closed his manuscript, upon the cover of which was written “Mirame, a
Tragedy in Five Acts,” and raised his head.

D’Artagnan recognized the cardinal.




40 A TERRIBLE VISION


The cardinal leaned his elbow on his manuscript, his cheek upon his
hand, and looked intently at the young man for a moment. No one had a
more searching eye than the Cardinal de Richelieu, and d’Artagnan felt
this glance run through his veins like a fever.

He however kept a good countenance, holding his hat in his hand and
awaiting the good pleasure of his Eminence, without too much assurance,
but also without too much humility.

“Monsieur,” said the cardinal, “are you a d’Artagnan from Bearn?”

“Yes, monseigneur,” replied the young man.

“There are several branches of the d’Artagnans at Tarbes and in its
environs,” said the cardinal; “to which do you belong?”

“I am the son of him who served in the Religious Wars under the great
King Henry, the father of his gracious Majesty.”

“That is well. It is you who set out seven or eight months ago from your
country to seek your fortune in the capital?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“You came through Meung, where something befell you. I don’t very well
know what, but still something.”

“Monseigneur,” said d’Artagnan, “this was what happened to me--”

“Never mind, never mind!” resumed the cardinal, with a smile which
indicated that he knew the story as well as he who wished to relate it.
“You were recommended to Monsieur de Treville, were you not?”

“Yes, monseigneur; but in that unfortunate affair at Meung--”

“The letter was lost,” replied his Eminence; “yes, I know that. But
Monsieur de Treville is a skilled physiognomist, who knows men at first
sight; and he placed you in the company of his brother-in-law, Monsieur
Dessessart, leaving you to hope that one day or other you should enter
the Musketeers.”

“Monseigneur is correctly informed,” said d’Artagnan.

“Since that time many things have happened to you. You were walking one
day behind the Chartreux, when it would have been better if you had been
elsewhere. Then you took with your friends a journey to the waters of
Forges; they stopped on the road, but you continued yours. That is all
very simple: you had business in England.”

“Monseigneur,” said d’Artagnan, quite confused, “I went--”

“Hunting at Windsor, or elsewhere--that concerns nobody. I know, because
it is my office to know everything. On your return you were received by
an august personage, and I perceive with pleasure that you preserve the
souvenir she gave you.”

D’Artagnan placed his hand upon the queen’s diamond, which he wore, and
quickly turned the stone inward; but it was too late.

“The day after that, you received a visit from Cavois,” resumed the
cardinal. “He went to desire you to come to the palace. You have not
returned that visit, and you were wrong.”

“Monseigneur, I feared I had incurred disgrace with your Eminence.”

“How could that be, monsieur? Could you incur my displeasure by having
followed the orders of your superiors with more intelligence and courage
than another would have done? It is the people who do not obey that I
punish, and not those who, like you, obey--but too well. As a proof,
remember the date of the day on which I had you bidden to come to me,
and seek in your memory for what happened to you that very night.”

That was the very evening when the abduction of Mme. Bonacieux took
place. D’Artagnan trembled; and he likewise recollected that during the
past half hour the poor woman had passed close to him, without doubt
carried away by the same power that had caused her disappearance.

“In short,” continued the cardinal, “as I have heard nothing of you for
some time past, I wished to know what you were doing. Besides, you owe
me some thanks. You must yourself have remarked how much you have been
considered in all the circumstances.”

D’Artagnan bowed with respect.

“That,” continued the cardinal, “arose not only from a feeling of
natural equity, but likewise from a plan I have marked out with respect
to you.”

D’Artagnan became more and more astonished.

“I wished to explain this plan to you on the day you received my first
invitation; but you did not come. Fortunately, nothing is lost by this
delay, and you are now about to hear it. Sit down there, before me,
d’Artagnan; you are gentleman enough not to listen standing.” And the
cardinal pointed with his finger to a chair for the young man, who was
so astonished at what was passing that he awaited a second sign from his
interlocutor before he obeyed.

“You are brave, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” continued his Eminence; “you are
prudent, which is still better. I like men of head and heart. Don’t be
afraid,” said he, smiling. “By men of heart I mean men of courage. But
young as you are, and scarcely entering into the world, you have
powerful enemies; if you do not take great heed, they will destroy you.”

“Alas, monseigneur!” replied the young man, “very easily, no doubt, for
they are strong and well supported, while I am alone.”

“Yes, that’s true; but alone as you are, you have done much already, and
will do still more, I don’t doubt. Yet you have need, I believe, to be
guided in the adventurous career you have undertaken; for, if I mistake
not, you came to Paris with the ambitious idea of making your fortune.”

“I am at the age of extravagant hopes, monseigneur,” said d’Artagnan.

“There are no extravagant hopes but for fools, monsieur, and you are a
man of understanding. Now, what would you say to an ensign’s commission
in my Guards, and a company after the campaign?”

“Ah, monseigneur.”

“You accept it, do you not?”

“Monseigneur,” replied d’Artagnan, with an embarrassed air.

“How? You refuse?” cried the cardinal, with astonishment.

“I am in his Majesty’s Guards, monseigneur, and I have no reason to be
dissatisfied.”

“But it appears to me that my Guards--mine--are also his Majesty’s
Guards; and whoever serves in a French corps serves the king.”

“Monseigneur, your Eminence has ill understood my words.”

“You want a pretext, do you not? I comprehend. Well, you have this
excuse: advancement, the opening campaign, the opportunity which I offer
you--so much for the world. As regards yourself, the need of protection;
for it is fit you should know, Monsieur d’Artagnan, that I have received
heavy and serious complaints against you. You do not consecrate your
days and nights wholly to the king’s service.”

D’Artagnan colored.

“In fact,” said the cardinal, placing his hand upon a bundle of papers,
“I have here a whole pile which concerns you. I know you to be a man of
resolution; and your services, well directed, instead of leading you to
ill, might be very advantageous to you. Come; reflect, and decide.”

“Your goodness confounds me, monseigneur,” replied d’Artagnan, “and I am
conscious of a greatness of soul in your Eminence that makes me mean as
an earthworm; but since Monseigneur permits me to speak freely--”

D’Artagnan paused.

“Yes; speak.”

“Then, I will presume to say that all my friends are in the king’s
Musketeers and Guards, and that by an inconceivable fatality my enemies
are in the service of your Eminence; I should, therefore, be ill
received here and ill regarded there if I accepted what Monseigneur
offers me.”

“Do you happen to entertain the haughty idea that I have not yet made
you an offer equal to your value?” asked the cardinal, with a smile of
disdain.

“Monseigneur, your Eminence is a hundred times too kind to me; and on
the contrary, I think I have not proved myself worthy of your goodness.
The siege of La Rochelle is about to be resumed, monseigneur. I shall
serve under the eye of your Eminence, and if I have the good fortune to
conduct myself at the siege in such a manner as merits your attention,
then I shall at least leave behind me some brilliant action to justify
the protection with which you honor me. Everything is best in its time,
monseigneur. Hereafter, perhaps, I shall have the right of giving
myself; at present I shall appear to sell myself.”

“That is to say, you refuse to serve me, monsieur,” said the cardinal,
with a tone of vexation, through which, however, might be seen a sort of
esteem; “remain free, then, and guard your hatreds and your sympathies.”

“Monseigneur--”

“Well, well,” said the cardinal, “I don’t wish you any ill; but you must
be aware that it is quite trouble enough to defend and recompense our
friends. We owe nothing to our enemies; and let me give you a piece of
advice; take care of yourself, Monsieur d’Artagnan, for from the moment
I withdraw my hand from behind you, I would not give an obolus for your
life.”

“I will try to do so, monseigneur,” replied the Gascon, with a noble
confidence.

“Remember at a later period and at a certain moment, if any mischance
should happen to you,” said Richelieu, significantly, “that it was I who
came to seek you, and that I did all in my power to prevent this
misfortune befalling you.”

“I shall entertain, whatever may happen,” said d’Artagnan, placing his
hand upon his breast and bowing, “an eternal gratitude toward your
Eminence for that which you now do for me.”

“Well, let it be, then, as you have said, Monsieur d’Artagnan; we shall
see each other again after the campaign. I will have my eye upon you,
for I shall be there,” replied the cardinal, pointing with his finger to
a magnificent suit of armor he was to wear, “and on our return, well--we
will settle our account!”

“Young man,” said Richelieu, “if I shall be able to say to you at
another time what I have said to you today, I promise you to do so.”

This last expression of Richelieu’s conveyed a terrible doubt; it
alarmed d’Artagnan more than a menace would have done, for it was a
warning. The cardinal, then, was seeking to preserve him from some
misfortune which threatened him. He opened his mouth to reply, but with
a haughty gesture the cardinal dismissed him.

D’Artagnan went out, but at the door his heart almost failed him, and he
felt inclined to return. Then the noble and severe countenance of Athos
crossed his mind; if he made the compact with the cardinal which he
required, Athos would no more give him his hand--Athos would renounce
him.

It was this fear that restrained him, so powerful is the influence of a
truly great character on all that surrounds it.

D’Artagnan descended by the staircase at which he had entered, and found
Athos and the four Musketeers waiting his appearance, and beginning to
grow uneasy. With a word, d’Artagnan reassured them; and Planchet ran to
inform the other sentinels that it was useless to keep guard longer, as
his master had come out safe from the Palais-Cardinal.

Returned home with Athos, Aramis and Porthos inquired eagerly the cause
of the strange interview; but d’Artagnan confined himself to telling
them that M. de Richelieu had sent for him to propose to him to enter
into his guards with the rank of ensign, and that he had refused.

“And you were right,” cried Aramis and Porthos, with one voice.

Athos fell into a profound reverie and answered nothing. But when they
were alone he said, “You have done that which you ought to have done,
d’Artagnan; but perhaps you have been wrong.”

D’Artagnan sighed deeply, for this voice responded to a secret voice of
his soul, which told him that great misfortunes awaited him.

The whole of the next day was spent in preparations for departure.
D’Artagnan went to take leave of M. de Treville. At that time it was
believed that the separation of the Musketeers and the Guards would be
but momentary, the king holding his Parliament that very day and
proposing to set out the day after. M. de Treville contented himself
with asking d’Artagnan if he could do anything for him, but d’Artagnan
answered that he was supplied with all he wanted.

That night brought together all those comrades of the Guards of M.
Dessessart and the company of Musketeers of M. de Treville who had been
accustomed to associate together. They were parting to meet again when
it pleased God, and if it pleased God. That night, then, was somewhat
riotous, as may be imagined. In such cases extreme preoccupation is only
to be combated by extreme carelessness.

At the first sound of the morning trumpet the friends separated; the
Musketeers hastening to the hotel of M. de Treville, the Guards to that
of M. Dessessart. Each of the captains then led his company to the
Louvre, where the king held his review.

The king was dull and appeared ill, which detracted a little from his
usual lofty bearing. In fact, the evening before, a fever had seized him
in the midst of the Parliament, while he was holding his Bed of Justice.
He had, not the less, decided upon setting out that same evening; and in
spite of the remonstrances that had been offered to him, he persisted in
having the review, hoping by setting it at defiance to conquer the
disease which began to lay hold upon him.

The review over, the Guards set forward alone on their march, the
Musketeers waiting for the king, which allowed Porthos time to go and
take a turn in his superb equipment in the Rue aux Ours.

The procurator’s wife saw him pass in his new uniform and on his fine
horse. She loved Porthos too dearly to allow him to part thus; she made
him a sign to dismount and come to her. Porthos was magnificent; his
spurs jingled, his cuirass glittered, his sword knocked proudly against
his ample limbs. This time the clerks evinced no inclination to laugh,
such a real ear clipper did Porthos appear.

The Musketeer was introduced to M. Coquenard, whose little gray eyes
sparkled with anger at seeing his cousin all blazing new. Nevertheless,
one thing afforded him inward consolation; it was expected by everybody
that the campaign would be a severe one. He whispered a hope to himself
that this beloved relative might be killed in the field.

Porthos paid his compliments to M. Coquenard and bade him farewell. M.
Coquenard wished him all sorts of prosperities. As to Mme. Coquenard,
she could not restrain her tears; but no evil impressions were taken
from her grief as she was known to be very much attached to her
relatives, about whom she was constantly having serious disputes with
her husband.

But the real adieux were made in Mme. Coquenard’s chamber; they were
heartrending.

As long as the procurator’s wife could follow him with her eyes, she
waved her handkerchief to him, leaning so far out of the window as to
lead people to believe she wished to precipitate herself. Porthos
received all these attentions like a man accustomed to such
demonstrations, only on turning the corner of the street he lifted his
hat gracefully, and waved it to her as a sign of adieu.

On his part Aramis wrote a long letter. To whom? Nobody knew. Kitty, who
was to set out that evening for Tours, was waiting in the next chamber.

Athos sipped the last bottle of his Spanish wine.

In the meantime d’Artagnan was defiling with his company. Arriving at
the Faubourg St. Antoine, he turned round to look gaily at the Bastille;
but as it was the Bastille alone he looked at, he did not observe
Milady, who, mounted upon a light chestnut horse, designated him with
her finger to two ill-looking men who came close up to the ranks to take
notice of him. To a look of interrogation which they made, Milady
replied by a sign that it was he. Then, certain that there could be no
mistake in the execution of her orders, she started her horse and
disappeared.

The two men followed the company, and on leaving the Faubourg St.
Antoine, mounted two horses properly equipped, which a servant without
livery had waiting for them.




41 THE SEIGE OF LA ROCHELLE


The Siege of La Rochelle was one of the great political events of the
reign of Louis XIII, and one of the great military enterprises of the
cardinal. It is, then, interesting and even necessary that we should say
a few words about it, particularly as many details of this siege are
connected in too important a manner with the story we have undertaken to
relate to allow us to pass it over in silence.

The political plans of the cardinal when he undertook this siege were
extensive. Let us unfold them first, and then pass on to the private
plans which perhaps had not less influence upon his Eminence than the
others.

Of the important cities given up by Henry IV to the Huguenots as places
of safety, there only remained La Rochelle. It became necessary,
therefore, to destroy this last bulwark of Calvinism--a dangerous leaven
with which the ferments of civil revolt and foreign war were constantly
mingling.

Spaniards, Englishmen, and Italian malcontents, adventurers of all
nations, and soldiers of fortune of every sect, flocked at the first
summons under the standard of the Protestants, and organized themselves
like a vast association, whose branches diverged freely over all parts
of Europe.

La Rochelle, which had derived a new importance from the ruin of the
other Calvinist cities, was, then, the focus of dissensions and
ambition. Moreover, its port was the last in the kingdom of France open
to the English, and by closing it against England, our eternal enemy,
the cardinal completed the work of Joan of Arc and the Duc de Guise.

Thus Bassompierre, who was at once Protestant and Catholic--Protestant
by conviction and Catholic as commander of the order of the Holy Ghost;
Bassompierre, who was a German by birth and a Frenchman at heart--in
