
The queen was, as we have said, of great beauty. The commission might
well be called delicate; and the king had reached, in his jealousy of
Buckingham, the point of not being jealous of anyone else.

Without doubt the chancellor Seguier looked about at that moment for the
rope of the famous bell; but not finding it he summoned his resolution,
and stretched forth his hands toward the place where the queen had
acknowledged the paper was to be found.

Anne of Austria took one step backward, became so pale that it might be
said she was dying, and leaning with her left hand upon a table behind
her to keep herself from falling, she with her right hand drew the paper
from her bosom and held it out to the keeper of the seals.

“There, monsieur, there is that letter!” cried the queen, with a broken
and trembling voice; “take it, and deliver me from your odious
presence.”

The chancellor, who, on his part, trembled with an emotion easily to be
conceived, took the letter, bowed to the ground, and retired. The door
was scarcely closed upon him, when the queen sank, half fainting, into
the arms of her women.

The chancellor carried the letter to the king without having read a
single word of it. The king took it with a trembling hand, looked for
the address, which was wanting, became very pale, opened it slowly, then
seeing by the first words that it was addressed to the King of Spain, he
read it rapidly.

It was nothing but a plan of attack against the cardinal. The queen
pressed her brother and the Emperor of Austria to appear to be wounded,
as they really were, by the policy of Richelieu--the eternal object of
which was the abasement of the house of Austria--to declare war against
France, and as a condition of peace, to insist upon the dismissal of the
cardinal; but as to love, there was not a single word about it in all
the letter.

The king, quite delighted, inquired if the cardinal was still at the
Louvre; he was told that his Eminence awaited the orders of his Majesty
in the business cabinet.

The king went straight to him.

“There, Duke,” said he, “you were right and I was wrong. The whole
intrigue is political, and there is not the least question of love in
this letter; but, on the other hand, there is abundant question of you.”

The cardinal took the letter, and read it with the greatest attention;
then, when he had arrived at the end of it, he read it a second time.
“Well, your Majesty,” said he, “you see how far my enemies go; they
menace you with two wars if you do not dismiss me. In your place, in
truth, sire, I should yield to such powerful instance; and on my part,
it would be a real happiness to withdraw from public affairs.”

“What say you, Duke?”

“I say, sire, that my health is sinking under these excessive struggles
and these never-ending labors. I say that according to all probability I
shall not be able to undergo the fatigues of the siege of La Rochelle,
and that it would be far better that you should appoint there either
Monsieur de Conde, Monsieur de Bassopierre, or some valiant gentleman
whose business is war, and not me, who am a churchman, and who am
constantly turned aside for my real vocation to look after matters for
which I have no aptitude. You would be the happier for it at home, sire,
and I do not doubt you would be the greater for it abroad.”

“Monsieur Duke,” said the king, “I understand you. Be satisfied, all who
are named in that letter shall be punished as they deserve, even the
queen herself.”

“What do you say, sire? God forbid that the queen should suffer the
least inconvenience or uneasiness on my account! She has always believed
me, sire, to be her enemy; although your Majesty can bear witness that I
have always taken her part warmly, even against you. Oh, if she betrayed
your Majesty on the side of your honor, it would be quite another thing,
and I should be the first to say, ‘No grace, sire--no grace for the
guilty!’ Happily, there is nothing of the kind, and your Majesty has
just acquired a new proof of it.”

“That is true, Monsieur Cardinal,” said the king, “and you were right,
as you always are; but the queen, not the less, deserves all my anger.”

“It is you, sire, who have now incurred hers. And even if she were to be
seriously offended, I could well understand it; your Majesty has treated
her with a severity--”

“It is thus I will always treat my enemies and yours, Duke, however high
they may be placed, and whatever peril I may incur in acting severely
toward them.”

“The queen is my enemy, but is not yours, sire; on the contrary, she is
a devoted, submissive, and irreproachable wife. Allow me, then, sire, to
intercede for her with your Majesty.”

“Let her humble herself, then, and come to me first.”

“On the contrary, sire, set the example. You have committed the first
wrong, since it was you who suspected the queen.”

“What! I make the first advances?” said the king. “Never!”

“Sire, I entreat you to do so.”

“Besides, in what manner can I make advances first?”

“By doing a thing which you know will be agreeable to her.”

“What is that?”

“Give a ball; you know how much the queen loves dancing. I will answer
for it, her resentment will not hold out against such an attention.”

“Monsieur Cardinal, you know that I do not like worldly pleasures.”

“The queen will only be the more grateful to you, as she knows your
antipathy for that amusement; besides, it will be an opportunity for her
to wear those beautiful diamonds which you gave her recently on her
birthday and with which she has since had no occasion to adorn herself.”

“We shall see, Monsieur Cardinal, we shall see,” said the king, who, in
his joy at finding the queen guilty of a crime which he cared little
about, and innocent of a fault of which he had great dread, was ready to
make up all differences with her, “we shall see, but upon my honor, you
are too indulgent toward her.”

“Sire,” said the cardinal, “leave severity to your ministers. Clemency
is a royal virtue; employ it, and you will find that you derive
advantage therein.”

Thereupon the cardinal, hearing the clock strike eleven, bowed low,
asking permission of the king to retire, and supplicating him to come to
a good understanding with the queen.

Anne of Austria, who, in consequence of the seizure of her letter,
expected reproaches, was much astonished the next day to see the king
make some attempts at reconciliation with her. Her first movement was
repellent. Her womanly pride and her queenly dignity had both been so
cruelly offended that she could not come round at the first advance;
but, overpersuaded by the advice of her women, she at last had the
appearance of beginning to forget. The king took advantage of this
favorable moment to tell her that he had the intention of shortly giving
a fete.

A fete was so rare a thing for poor Anne of Austria that at this
announcement, as the cardinal had predicted, the last trace of her
resentment disappeared, if not from her heart, at least from her
countenance. She asked upon what day this fete would take place, but the
king replied that he must consult the cardinal upon that head.

Indeed, every day the king asked the cardinal when this fete should take
place; and every day the cardinal, under some pretext, deferred fixing
it. Ten days passed away thus.

On the eighth day after the scene we have described, the cardinal
received a letter with the London stamp which only contained these
lines: “I have them; but I am unable to leave London for want of money.
Send me five hundred pistoles, and four or five days after I have
received them I shall be in Paris.”

On the same day the cardinal received this letter the king put his
customary question to him.

Richelieu counted on his fingers, and said to himself, “She will arrive,
she says, four or five days after having received the money. It will
require four or five days for the transmission of the money, four or
five days for her to return; that makes ten days. Now, allowing for
contrary winds, accidents, and a woman’s weakness, there are twelve
days.”

“Well, Monsieur Duke,” said the king, “have you made your calculations?”

“Yes, sire. Today is the twentieth of September. The aldermen of the
city give a fete on the third of October. That will fall in wonderfully
well; you will not appear to have gone out of your way to please the
queen.”

Then the cardinal added, “A PROPOS, sire, do not forget to tell her
Majesty the evening before the fete that you should like to see how her
diamond studs become her.”




17 BONACIEUX AT HOME


It was the second time the cardinal had mentioned these diamond studs to
the king. Louis XIII was struck with this insistence, and began to fancy
that this recommendation concealed some mystery.

More than once the king had been humiliated by the cardinal, whose
police, without having yet attained the perfection of the modern police,
were excellent, being better informed than himself, even upon what was
going on in his own household. He hoped, then, in a conversation with
Anne of Austria, to obtain some information from that conversation, and
afterward to come upon his Eminence with some secret which the cardinal
either knew or did not know, but which, in either case, would raise him
infinitely in the eyes of his minister.

He went then to the queen, and according to custom accosted her with
fresh menaces against those who surrounded her. Anne of Austria lowered
her head, allowed the torrent to flow on without replying, hoping that
it would cease of itself; but this was not what Louis XIII meant. Louis
XIII wanted a discussion from which some light or other might break,
convinced as he was that the cardinal had some afterthought and was
preparing for him one of those terrible surprises which his Eminence was
so skillful in getting up. He arrived at this end by his persistence in
accusation.

“But,” cried Anne of Austria, tired of these vague attacks, “but, sire,
you do not tell me all that you have in your heart. What have I done,
then? Let me know what crime I have committed. It is impossible that
your Majesty can make all this ado about a letter written to my
brother.”

The king, attacked in a manner so direct, did not know what to answer;
and he thought that this was the moment for expressing the desire which
he was not going to have made until the evening before the fete.

“Madame,” said he, with dignity, “there will shortly be a ball at the
Hotel de Ville. I wish, in order to honor our worthy aldermen, you
should appear in ceremonial costume, and above all, ornamented with the
diamond studs which I gave you on your birthday. That is my answer.”

The answer was terrible. Anne of Austria believed that Louis XIII knew
all, and that the cardinal had persuaded him to employ this long
dissimulation of seven or eight days, which, likewise, was
characteristic. She became excessively pale, leaned her beautiful hand
upon a CONSOLE, which hand appeared then like one of wax, and looking at
the king with terror in her eyes, she was unable to reply by a single
syllable.

“You hear, madame,” said the king, who enjoyed the embarrassment to its
full extent, but without guessing the cause. “You hear, madame?”

“Yes, sire, I hear,” stammered the queen.

“You will appear at this ball?”

“Yes.”

“With those studs?”

“Yes.”

The queen’s paleness, if possible, increased; the king perceived it, and
enjoyed it with that cold cruelty which was one of the worst sides of
his character.

“Then that is agreed,” said the king, “and that is all I had to say to
you.”

“But on what day will this ball take place?” asked Anne of Austria.

Louis XIII felt instinctively that he ought not to reply to this
question, the queen having put it in an almost dying voice.

“Oh, very shortly, madame,” said he; “but I do not precisely recollect
the date of the day. I will ask the cardinal.”

“It was the cardinal, then, who informed you of this fete?”

“Yes, madame,” replied the astonished king; “but why do you ask that?”

“It was he who told you to invite me to appear with these studs?”

“That is to say, madame--”

“It was he, sire, it was he!”

“Well, and what does it signify whether it was he or I? Is there any
crime in this request?”

“No, sire.”

“Then you will appear?”

“Yes, sire.”

“That is well,” said the king, retiring, “that is well; I count upon
it.”

The queen made a curtsy, less from etiquette than because her knees were
sinking under her. The king went away enchanted.

“I am lost,” murmured the queen, “lost!--for the cardinal knows all, and
it is he who urges on the king, who as yet knows nothing but will soon
know everything. I am lost! My God, my God, my God!”

She knelt upon a cushion and prayed, with her head buried between her
palpitating arms.

In fact, her position was terrible. Buckingham had returned to London;
Mme. de Chevreuse was at Tours. More closely watched than ever, the
queen felt certain, without knowing how to tell which, that one of her
women had betrayed her. Laporte could not leave the Louvre; she had not
a soul in the world in whom she could confide. Thus, while contemplating
the misfortune which threatened her and the abandonment in which she was
left, she broke out into sobs and tears.

“Can I be of service to your Majesty?” said all at once a voice full of
sweetness and pity.

The queen turned sharply round, for there could be no deception in the
expression of that voice; it was a friend who spoke thus.

In fact, at one of the doors which opened into the queen’s apartment
appeared the pretty Mme. Bonacieux. She had been engaged in arranging
the dresses and linen in a closet when the king entered; she could not
get out and had heard all.

The queen uttered a piercing cry at finding herself surprised--for in
her trouble she did not at first recognize the young woman who had been
given to her by Laporte.

“Oh, fear nothing, madame!” said the young woman, clasping her hands and
weeping herself at the queen’s sorrows; “I am your Majesty’s, body and
soul, and however far I may be from you, however inferior may be my
position, I believe I have discovered a means of extricating your
Majesty from your trouble.”

“You, oh, heaven, you!” cried the queen; “but look me in the face. I am
betrayed on all sides. Can I trust in you?”

“Oh, madame!” cried the young woman, falling on her knees; “upon my
soul, I am ready to die for your Majesty!”

This expression sprang from the very bottom of the heart, and, like the
first, there was no mistaking it.

“Yes,” continued Mme. Bonacieux, “yes, there are traitors here; but by
the holy name of the Virgin, I swear that no one is more devoted to your
Majesty than I am. Those studs which the king speaks of, you gave them
to the Duke of Buckingham, did you not? Those studs were enclosed in a
little rosewood box which he held under his arm? Am I deceived? Is it
not so, madame?”

“Oh, my God, my God!” murmured the queen, whose teeth chattered with
fright.

“Well, those studs,” continued Mme. Bonacieux, “we must have them back
again.”

“Yes, without doubt, it is necessary,” cried the queen; “but how am I to
act? How can it be effected?”

“Someone must be sent to the duke.”

“But who, who? In whom can I trust?”

“Place confidence in me, madame; do me that honor, my queen, and I will
find a messenger.”

“But I must write.”

“Oh, yes; that is indispensable. Two words from the hand of your Majesty
and your private seal.”

“But these two words would bring about my condemnation, divorce, exile!”

“Yes, if they fell into infamous hands. But I will answer for these two
words being delivered to their address.”

“Oh, my God! I must then place my life, my honor, my reputation, in your
hands?”

“Yes, yes, madame, you must; and I will save them all.”

“But how? Tell me at least the means.”

“My husband had been at liberty these two or three days. I have not yet
had time to see him again. He is a worthy, honest man who entertains
neither love nor hatred for anybody. He will do anything I wish. He will
set out upon receiving an order from me, without knowing what he
carries, and he will carry your Majesty’s letter, without even knowing
it is from your Majesty, to the address which is on it.”

The queen took the two hands of the young woman with a burst of emotion,
gazed at her as if to read her very heart, and, seeing nothing but
sincerity in her beautiful eyes, embraced her tenderly.

“Do that,” cried she, “and you will have saved my life, you will have
saved my honor!”

“Do not exaggerate the service I have the happiness to render your
Majesty. I have nothing to save for your Majesty; you are only the
victim of perfidious plots.”

“That is true, that is true, my child,” said the queen, “you are right.”

“Give me then, that letter, madame; time presses.”

The queen ran to a little table, on which were ink, paper, and pens. She
wrote two lines, sealed the letter with her private seal, and gave it to
Mme. Bonacieux.

“And now,” said the queen, “we are forgetting one very necessary thing.”

“What is that, madame?”

“Money.”

Mme. Bonacieux blushed.

“Yes, that is true,” said she, “and I will confess to your Majesty that
my husband--”

“Your husband has none. Is that what you would say?”

“He has some, but he is very avaricious; that is his fault.
Nevertheless, let not your Majesty be uneasy, we will find means.”

“And I have none, either,” said the queen. Those who have read the
MEMOIRS of Mme. de Motteville will not be astonished at this reply. “But
wait a minute.”

Anne of Austria ran to her jewel case.

“Here,” said she, “here is a ring of great value, as I have been
assured. It came from my brother, the King of Spain. It is mine, and I
am at liberty to dispose of it. Take this ring; raise money with it, and
let your husband set out.”

“In an hour you shall be obeyed.”

“You see the address,” said the queen, speaking so low that Mme.
Bonacieux could hardly hear what she said, “To my Lord Duke of
Buckingham, London.”

“The letter shall be given to himself.”

“Generous girl!” cried Anne of Austria.

Mme. Bonacieux kissed the hands of the queen, concealed the paper in the
bosom of her dress, and disappeared with the lightness of a bird.

Ten minutes afterward she was at home. As she told the queen, she had
not seen her husband since his liberation; she was ignorant of the
change that had taken place in him with respect to the cardinal--a
change which had since been strengthened by two or three visits from the
Comte de Rochefort, who had become the best friend of Bonacieux, and had
persuaded him, without much trouble, that no culpable sentiments had
prompted the abduction of his wife, but that it was only a political
precaution.

She found M. Bonacieux alone; the poor man was recovering with
difficulty the order in his house, in which he had found most of the
furniture broken and the closets nearly emptied--justice not being one
of the three things which King Solomon names as leaving no traces of
their passage. As to the servant, she had run away at the moment of her
master’s arrest. Terror had had such an effect upon the poor girl that
she had never ceased walking from Paris till she reached Burgundy, her
native place.

The worthy mercer had, immediately upon re-entering his house, informed
his wife of his happy return, and his wife had replied by congratulating
him, and telling him that the first moment she could steal from her
duties should be devoted to paying him a visit.

This first moment had been delayed five days, which, under any other
circumstances, might have appeared rather long to M. Bonacieux; but he
had, in the visit he had made to the cardinal and in the visits
Rochefort had made him, ample subjects for reflection, and as everybody
knows, nothing makes time pass more quickly than reflection.

This was the more so because Bonacieux’s reflections were all
rose-colored. Rochefort called him his friend, his dear Bonacieux, and
never ceased telling him that the cardinal had a great respect for him.
The mercer fancied himself already on the high road to honors and
fortune.

On her side Mme. Bonacieux had also reflected; but, it must be admitted,
upon something widely different from ambition. In spite of herself her
thoughts constantly reverted to that handsome young man who was so brave
and appeared to be so much in love. Married at eighteen to M. Bonacieux,
having always lived among her husband’s friends--people little capable
of inspiring any sentiment whatever in a young woman whose heart was
above her position--Mme. Bonacieux had remained insensible to vulgar
seductions; but at this period the title of gentleman had great
influence with the citizen class, and d’Artagnan was a gentleman.
Besides, he wore the uniform of the Guards, which, next to that of the
Musketeers, was most admired by the ladies. He was, we repeat, handsome,
young, and bold; he spoke of love like a man who did love and was
anxious to be loved in return. There was certainly enough in all this to
turn a head only twenty-three years old, and Mme. Bonacieux had just
attained that happy period of life.

The couple, then, although they had not seen each other for eight days,
and during that time serious events had taken place in which both were
concerned, accosted each other with a degree of preoccupation.
Nevertheless, Bonacieux manifested real joy, and advanced toward his
wife with open arms. Madame Bonacieux presented her cheek to him.

“Let us talk a little,” said she.

“How!” said Bonacieux, astonished.

“Yes, I have something of the highest importance to tell you.”

“True,” said he, “and I have some questions sufficiently serious to put
to you. Describe to me your abduction, I pray you.”

“Oh, that’s of no consequence just now,” said Mme. Bonacieux.

“And what does it concern, then--my captivity?”

“I heard of it the day it happened; but as you were not guilty of any
crime, as you were not guilty of any intrigue, as you, in short, knew
nothing that could compromise yourself or anybody else, I attached no
more importance to that event than it merited.”

“You speak very much at your ease, madame,” said Bonacieux, hurt at the
little interest his wife showed in him. “Do you know that I was plunged
during a day and night in a dungeon of the Bastille?”

“Oh, a day and night soon pass away. Let us return to the object that
brings me here.”

“What, that which brings you home to me? Is it not the desire of seeing
a husband again from whom you have been separated for a week?” asked the
mercer, piqued to the quick.

“Yes, that first, and other things afterward.”

“Speak.”

“It is a thing of the highest interest, and upon which our future
fortune perhaps depends.”

“The complexion of our fortune has changed very much since I saw you,
Madame Bonacieux, and I should not be astonished if in the course of a
few months it were to excite the envy of many folks.”

“Yes, particularly if you follow the instructions I am about to give
you.”

“Me?”

“Yes, you. There is good and holy action to be performed, monsieur, and
much money to be gained at the same time.”

Mme. Bonacieux knew that in talking of money to her husband, she took
him on his weak side. But a man, were he even a mercer, when he had
talked for ten minutes with Cardinal Richelieu, is no longer the same
man.

“Much money to be gained?” said Bonacieux, protruding his lip.

“Yes, much.”

“About how much?”

“A thousand pistoles, perhaps.”

“What you demand of me is serious, then?”

“It is indeed.”

“What must be done?”

“You must go away immediately. I will give you a paper which you must
not part with on any account, and which you will deliver into the proper
hands.”

“And whither am I to go?”

“To London.”

“I go to London? Go to! You jest! I have no business in London.”

“But others wish that you should go there.”

“But who are those others? I warn you that I will never again work in
the dark, and that I will know not only to what I expose myself, but for
whom I expose myself.”

“An illustrious person sends you; an illustrious person awaits you. The
recompense will exceed your expectations; that is all I promise you.”

“More intrigues! Nothing but intrigues! Thank you, madame, I am aware of
them now; Monsieur Cardinal has enlightened me on that head.”

“The cardinal?” cried Mme. Bonacieux. “Have you seen the cardinal?”

“He sent for me,” answered the mercer, proudly.

“And you responded to his bidding, you imprudent man?”

“Well, I can’t say I had much choice of going or not going, for I was
taken to him between two guards. It is true also, that as I did not then
know his Eminence, if I had been able to dispense with the visit, I
should have been enchanted.”

“He ill-treated you, then; he threatened you?”

“He gave me his hand, and called me his friend. His friend! Do you hear
that, madame? I am the friend of the great cardinal!”

“Of the great cardinal!”

“Perhaps you would contest his right to that title, madame?”

“I would contest nothing; but I tell you that the favor of a minister is
ephemeral, and that a man must be mad to attach himself to a minister.
There are powers above his which do not depend upon a man or the issue
of an event; it is to these powers we should rally.”

“I am sorry for it, madame, but I acknowledge no other power but that of
the great man whom I have the honor to serve.”

“You serve the cardinal?”

“Yes, madame; and as his servant, I will not allow you to be concerned
in plots against the safety of the state, or to serve the intrigues of a
woman who is not French and who has a Spanish heart. Fortunately we have
the great cardinal; his vigilant eye watches over and penetrates to the
bottom of the heart.”

Bonacieux was repeating, word for word, a sentence which he had heard
from the Comte de Rochefort; but the poor wife, who had reckoned on her
husband, and who, in that hope, had answered for him to the queen, did
not tremble the less, both at the danger into which she had nearly cast
herself and at the helpless state to which she was reduced.
Nevertheless, knowing the weakness of her husband, and more particularly
his cupidity, she did not despair of bringing him round to her purpose.

“Ah, you are a cardinalist, then, monsieur, are you?” cried she; “and
you serve the party of those who maltreat your wife and insult your
queen?”

“Private interests are as nothing before the interests of all. I am for
those who save the state,” said Bonacieux, emphatically.

“And what do you know about the state you talk of?” said Mme. Bonacieux,
shrugging her shoulders. “Be satisfied with being a plain,
straightforward citizen, and turn to that side which offers the most
advantages.”

“Eh, eh!” said Bonacieux, slapping a plump, round bag, which returned a
sound a money; “what do you think of this, Madame Preacher?”

“Whence comes that money?”

“You do not guess?”

“From the cardinal?”

“From him, and from my friend the Comte de Rochefort.”

“The Comte de Rochefort! Why, it was he who carried me off!”

“That may be, madame!”

“And you receive silver from that man?”

“Have you not said that that abduction was entirely political?”

“Yes; but that abduction had for its object the betrayal of my mistress,
to draw from me by torture confessions that might compromise the honor,
and perhaps the life, of my august mistress.”

“Madame,” replied Bonacieux, “your august mistress is a perfidious
Spaniard, and what the cardinal does is well done.”

“Monsieur,” said the young woman, “I know you to be cowardly,
avaricious, and foolish, but I never till now believed you infamous!”

“Madame,” said Bonacieux, who had never seen his wife in a passion, and
who recoiled before this conjugal anger, “madame, what do you say?”

“I say you are a miserable creature!” continued Mme. Bonacieux, who saw
she was regaining some little influence over her husband. “You meddle
with politics, do you--and still more, with cardinalist politics? Why,
you sell yourself, body and soul, to the demon, the devil, for money!”

“No, to the cardinal.”

“It’s the same thing,” cried the young woman. “Who calls Richelieu calls
Satan.”

“Hold your tongue, hold your tongue, madame! You may be overheard.”

“Yes, you are right; I should be ashamed for anyone to know your
baseness.”

“But what do you require of me, then? Let us see.”

“I have told you. You must depart instantly, monsieur. You must
accomplish loyally the commission with which I deign to charge you, and
on that condition I pardon everything, I forget everything; and what is
more,” and she held out her hand to him, “I restore my love.”

Bonacieux was cowardly and avaricious, but he loved his wife. He was
softened. A man of fifty cannot long bear malice with a wife of
twenty-three. Mme. Bonacieux saw that he hesitated.

“Come! Have you decided?” said she.

“But, my dear love, reflect a little upon what you require of me. London
is far from Paris, very far, and perhaps the commission with which you
charge me is not without dangers?”

“What matters it, if you avoid them?”

“Hold, Madame Bonacieux,” said the mercer, “hold! I positively refuse;
intrigues terrify me. I have seen the Bastille. My! Whew! That’s a
frightful place, that Bastille! Only to think of it makes my flesh
crawl. They threatened me with torture. Do you know what torture is?
Wooden points that they stick in between your legs till your bones stick
out! No, positively I will not go. And, MORBLEU, why do you not go
yourself? For in truth, I think I have hitherto been deceived in you. I
really believe you are a man, and a violent one, too.”

“And you, you are a woman--a miserable woman, stupid and brutal. You are
afraid, are you? Well, if you do not go this very instant, I will have
you arrested by the queen’s orders, and I will have you placed in the
Bastille which you dread so much.”

Bonacieux fell into a profound reflection. He weighed the two angers in
his brain--that of the cardinal and that of the queen; that of the
cardinal predominated enormously.

“Have me arrested on the part of the queen,” said he, “and I--I will
appeal to his Eminence.”

At once Mme. Bonacieux saw that she had gone too far, and she was
terrified at having communicated so much. She for a moment contemplated
with fright that stupid countenance, impressed with the invincible
resolution of a fool that is overcome by fear.

“Well, be it so!” said she. “Perhaps, when all is considered, you are
right. In the long run, a man knows more about politics than a woman,
particularly such as, like you, Monsieur Bonacieux, have conversed with
the cardinal. And yet it is very hard,” added she, “that a man upon
whose affection I thought I might depend, treats me thus unkindly and
will not comply with any of my fancies.”

“That is because your fancies go too far,” replied the triumphant
Bonacieux, “and I mistrust them.”

“Well, I will give it up, then,” said the young woman, sighing. “It is
well as it is; say no more about it.”

“At least you should tell me what I should have to do in London,”
replied Bonacieux, who remembered a little too late that Rochefort had
desired him to endeavor to obtain his wife’s secrets.

“It is of no use for you to know anything about it,” said the young
woman, whom an instinctive mistrust now impelled to draw back. “It was
about one of those purchases that interest women--a purchase by which
much might have been gained.”

But the more the young woman excused herself, the more important
Bonacieux thought the secret which she declined to confide to him. He
resolved then to hasten immediately to the residence of the Comte de
Rochefort, and tell him that the queen was seeking for a messenger to
send to London.

“Pardon me for quitting you, my dear Madame Bonacieux,” said he; “but,
not knowing you would come to see me, I had made an engagement with a
friend. I shall soon return; and if you will wait only a few minutes for
me, as soon as I have concluded my business with that friend, as it is
growing late, I will come back and reconduct you to the Louvre.”

“Thank you, monsieur, you are not brave enough to be of any use to me
whatever,” replied Mme. Bonacieux. “I shall return very safely to the
Louvre all alone.”

“As you please, Madame Bonacieux,” said the ex-mercer. “Shall I see you
again soon?”

“Next week I hope my duties will afford me a little liberty, and I will
take advantage of it to come and put things in order here, as they must
necessarily be much deranged.”

“Very well; I shall expect you. You are not angry with me?”

“Not the least in the world.”

“Till then, then?”

“Till then.”

Bonacieux kissed his wife’s hand, and set off at a quick pace.

“Well,” said Mme. Bonacieux, when her husband had shut the street door
and she found herself alone; “that imbecile lacked but one thing: to
become a cardinalist. And I, who have answered for him to the queen--I,
who have promised my poor mistress--ah, my God, my God! She will take me
for one of those wretches with whom the palace swarms and who are placed
about her as spies! Ah, Monsieur Bonacieux, I never did love you much,
but now it is worse than ever. I hate you, and on my word you shall pay
for this!”

At the moment she spoke these words a rap on the ceiling made her raise
her head, and a voice which reached her through the ceiling cried, “Dear
Madame Bonacieux, open for me the little door on the alley, and I will
come down to you.”




18 LOVER AND HUSBAND


Ah, Madame,” said d’Artagnan, entering by the door which the young woman
opened for him, “allow me to tell you that you have a bad sort of a
husband.”

“You have, then, overheard our conversation?” asked Mme. Bonacieux,
eagerly, and looking at d’Artagnan with disquiet.

“The whole.”

“But how, my God?”

“By a mode of proceeding known to myself, and by which I likewise
overheard the more animated conversation which he had with the
cardinal’s police.”

“And what did you understand by what we said?”

“A thousand things. In the first place, that, unfortunately, your
husband is a simpleton and a fool; in the next place, you are in
trouble, of which I am very glad, as it gives me an opportunity of
placing myself at your service, and God knows I am ready to throw myself
into the fire for you; finally, that the queen wants a brave,
intelligent, devoted man to make a journey to London for her. I have at
least two of the three qualities you stand in need of, and here I am.”

Mme. Bonacieux made no reply; but her heart beat with joy and secret
hope shone in her eyes.

“And what guarantee will you give me,” asked she, “if I consent to
confide this message to you?”

“My love for you. Speak! Command! What is to be done?”

“My God, my God!” murmured the young woman, “ought I to confide such a
secret to you, monsieur? You are almost a boy.”

“I see that you require someone to answer for me?”

“I admit that would reassure me greatly.”

“Do you know Athos?”

“No.”

“Porthos?”

“No.”

“Aramis?”

“No. Who are these gentleman?”

“Three of the king’s Musketeers. Do you know Monsieur de Treville, their
captain?”

“Oh, yes, him! I know him; not personally, but from having heard the
queen speak of him more than once as a brave and loyal gentleman.”

“You do not fear lest he should betray you to the cardinal?”

“Oh, no, certainly not!”

“Well, reveal your secret to him, and ask him whether, however
important, however valuable, however terrible it may be, you may not
confide it to me.”

“But this secret is not mine, and I cannot reveal it in this manner.”

“You were about to confide it to Monsieur Bonacieux,” said d’Artagnan,
with chagrin.

“As one confides a letter to the hollow of a tree, to the wing of a
pigeon, to the collar of a dog.”

“And yet, me--you see plainly that I love you.”

“You say so.”

“I am an honorable man.”

“You say so.”

“I am a gallant fellow.”

“I believe it.”

“I am brave.”

“Oh, I am sure of that!”

“Then, put me to the proof.”

Mme. Bonacieux looked at the young man, restrained for a minute by a
last hesitation; but there was such an ardor in his eyes, such
persuasion in his voice, that she felt herself constrained to confide in
him. Besides, she found herself in circumstances where everything must
be risked for the sake of everything. The queen might be as much injured
by too much reticence as by too much confidence; and--let us admit
it--the involuntary sentiment which she felt for her young protector
decided her to speak.

“Listen,” said she; “I yield to your protestations, I yield to your
assurances. But I swear to you, before God who hears us, that if you
betray me, and my enemies pardon me, I will kill myself, while accusing
you of my death.”

“And I--I swear to you before God, madame,” said d’Artagnan, “that if I
am taken while accomplishing the orders you give me, I will die sooner
than do anything that may compromise anyone.”

Then the young woman confided in him the terrible secret of which chance
had already communicated to him a part in front of the Samaritaine. This
was their mutual declaration of love.

D’Artagnan was radiant with joy and pride. This secret which he
possessed, this woman whom he loved! Confidence and love made him a
giant.

“I go,” said he; “I go at once.”

“How, you will go!” said Mme. Bonacieux; “and your regiment, your
captain?”

“By my soul, you had made me forget all that, dear Constance! Yes, you
are right; a furlough is needful.”

“Still another obstacle,” murmured Mme. Bonacieux, sorrowfully.

“As to that,” cried d’Artagnan, after a moment of reflection, “I shall
surmount it, be assured.”

“How so?”

“I will go this very evening to Treville, whom I will request to ask
this favor for me of his brother-in-law, Monsieur Dessessart.”

“But another thing.”

“What?” asked d’Artagnan, seeing that Mme. Bonacieux hesitated to
continue.

“You have, perhaps, no money?”

“PERHAPS is too much,” said d’Artagnan, smiling.

“Then,” replied Mme. Bonacieux, opening a cupboard and taking from it
the very bag which a half hour before her husband had caressed so
affectionately, “take this bag.”

“The cardinal’s?” cried d’Artagnan, breaking into a loud laugh, he
having heard, as may be remembered, thanks to the broken boards, every
syllable of the conversation between the mercer and his wife.

“The cardinal’s,” replied Mme. Bonacieux. “You see it makes a very
respectable appearance.”

“PARDIEU,” cried d’Artagnan, “it will be a double amusing affair to save
the queen with the cardinal’s money!”

“You are an amiable and charming young man,” said Mme. Bonacieux. “Be
assured you will not find her Majesty ungrateful.”

“Oh, I am already grandly recompensed!” cried d’Artagnan. “I love you;
you permit me to tell you that I do--that is already more happiness than
I dared to hope.”

“Silence!” said Mme. Bonacieux, starting.

“What!”

“Someone is talking in the street.”

“It is the voice of--”

“Of my husband! Yes, I recognize it!”

D’Artagnan ran to the door and pushed the bolt.

“He shall not come in before I am gone,” said he; “and when I am gone,
you can open to him.”

“But I ought to be gone, too. And the disappearance of his money; how am
I to justify it if I am here?”

“You are right; we must go out.”

“Go out? How? He will see us if we go out.”

“Then you must come up into my room.”

“Ah,” said Mme. Bonacieux, “you speak that in a tone that frightens me!”

Mme. Bonacieux pronounced these words with tears in her eyes. D’Artagnan
saw those tears, and much disturbed, softened, he threw himself at her
feet.

“With me you will be as safe as in a temple; I give you my word of a
gentleman.”

“Let us go,” said she, “I place full confidence in you, my friend!”

D’Artagnan drew back the bolt with precaution, and both, light as
shadows, glided through the interior door into the passage, ascended the
stairs as quietly as possible, and entered d’Artagnan’s chambers.

Once there, for greater security, the young man barricaded the door.
They both approached the window, and through a slit in the shutter they
saw Bonacieux talking with a man in a cloak.

At sight of this man, d’Artagnan started, and half drawing his sword,
sprang toward the door.

It was the man of Meung.

“What are you going to do?” cried Mme. Bonacieux; “you will ruin us
all!”

“But I have sworn to kill that man!” said d’Artagnan.

“Your life is devoted from this moment, and does not belong to you. In
the name of the queen I forbid you to throw yourself into any peril
which is foreign to that of your journey.”

“And do you command nothing in your own name?”

“In my name,” said Mme. Bonacieux, with great emotion, “in my name I beg
you! But listen; they appear to be speaking of me.”

D’Artagnan drew near the window, and lent his ear.

M Bonacieux had opened his door, and seeing the apartment, had returned
to the man in the cloak, whom he had left alone for an instant.

“She is gone,” said he; “she must have returned to the Louvre.”

“You are sure,” replied the stranger, “that she did not suspect the
intentions with which you went out?”

“No,” replied Bonacieux, with a self-sufficient air, “she is too
superficial a woman.”

“Is the young Guardsman at home?”

“I do not think he is; as you see, his shutter is closed, and you can
see no light shine through the chinks of the shutters.”

“All the same, it is well to be certain.”

“How so?”

“By knocking at his door. Go.”

“I will ask his servant.”

Bonacieux re-entered the house, passed through the same door that had
afforded a passage for the two fugitives, went up to d’Artagnan’s door,
and knocked.

No one answered. Porthos, in order to make a greater display, had that
evening borrowed Planchet. As to d’Artagnan, he took care not to give
the least sign of existence.

The moment the hand of Bonacieux sounded on the door, the two young
people felt their hearts bound within them.

“There is nobody within,” said Bonacieux.

“Never mind. Let us return to your apartment. We shall be safer there
than in the doorway.”

“Ah, my God!” whispered Mme. Bonacieux, “we shall hear no more.”

“On the contrary,” said d’Artagnan, “we shall hear better.”

D’Artagnan raised the three or four boards which made his chamber
another ear of Dionysius, spread a carpet on the floor, went upon his
knees, and made a sign to Mme. Bonacieux to stoop as he did toward the
opening.

“You are sure there is nobody there?” said the stranger.

“I will answer for it,” said Bonacieux.

“And you think that your wife--”

“Has returned to the Louvre.”

“Without speaking to anyone but yourself?”

“I am sure of it.”

“That is an important point, do you understand?”

“Then the news I brought you is of value?”

“The greatest, my dear Bonacieux; I don’t conceal this from you.”

“Then the cardinal will be pleased with me?”

“I have no doubt of it.”

“The great cardinal!”

“Are you sure, in her conversation with you, that your wife mentioned no
names?”

“I think not.”

“She did not name Madame de Chevreuse, the Duke of Buckingham, or Madame
de Vernet?”

“No; she only told me she wished to send me to London to serve the
interests of an illustrious personage.”

“The traitor!” murmured Mme. Bonacieux.

“Silence!” said d’Artagnan, taking her hand, which, without thinking of
it, she abandoned to him.

“Never mind,” continued the man in the cloak; “you were a fool not to
have pretended to accept the mission. You would then be in present
possession of the letter. The state, which is now threatened, would be
safe, and you--”

“And I?”

“Well you--the cardinal would have given you letters of nobility.”

“Did he tell you so?”

“Yes, I know that he meant to afford you that agreeable surprise.”

“Be satisfied,” replied Bonacieux; “my wife adores me, and there is yet
time.”

“The ninny!” murmured Mme. Bonacieux.

“Silence!” said d’Artagnan, pressing her hand more closely.

“How is there still time?” asked the man in the cloak.

“I go to the Louvre; I ask for Mme. Bonacieux; I say that I have
reflected; I renew the affair; I obtain the letter, and I run directly
to the cardinal.”

“Well, go quickly! I will return soon to learn the result of your trip.”

The stranger went out.

“Infamous!” said Mme. Bonacieux, addressing this epithet to her husband.

“Silence!” said d’Artagnan, pressing her hand still more warmly.

A terrible howling interrupted these reflections of d’Artagnan and Mme.
Bonacieux. It was her husband, who had discovered the disappearance of
the moneybag, and was crying “Thieves!”

“Oh, my God!” cried Mme. Bonacieux, “he will rouse the whole quarter.”

Bonacieux called a long time; but as such cries, on account of their
frequency, brought nobody in the Rue des Fossoyeurs, and as lately the
mercer’s house had a bad name, finding that nobody came, he went out
continuing to call, his voice being heard fainter and fainter as he went
in the direction of the Rue du Bac.

“Now he is gone, it is your turn to get out,” said Mme. Bonacieux.
“Courage, my friend, but above all, prudence, and think what you owe to
the queen.”

“To her and to you!” cried d’Artagnan. “Be satisfied, beautiful
Constance. I shall become worthy of her gratitude; but shall I likewise
return worthy of your love?”

The young woman only replied by the beautiful glow which mounted to her
cheeks. A few seconds afterward d’Artagnan also went out enveloped in a
large cloak, which ill-concealed the sheath of a long sword.

Mme. Bonacieux followed him with her eyes, with that long, fond look
with which he had turned the angle of the street, she fell on her knees,
and clasping her hands, “Oh, my God,” cried she, “protect the queen,
protect me!”




19 PLAN OF CAMPAIGN


D’Artagnan went straight to M. de Treville’s. He had reflected that in a
few minutes the cardinal would be warned by this cursed stranger, who
appeared to be his agent, and he judged, with reason, he had not a
moment to lose.

The heart of the young man overflowed with joy. An opportunity presented
itself to him in which there would be at the same time glory to be
acquired, and money to be gained; and as a far higher encouragement, it
brought him into close intimacy with a woman he adored. This chance did,
then, for him at once more than he would have dared to ask of
Providence.

M de Treville was in his saloon with his habitual court of gentlemen.
D’Artagnan, who was known as a familiar of the house, went straight to
his office, and sent word that he wished to see him on something of
importance.

D’Artagnan had been there scarcely five minutes when M. de Treville
entered. At the first glance, and by the joy which was painted on his
countenance, the worthy captain plainly perceived that something new was
on foot.

All the way along d’Artagnan had been consulting with himself whether he
should place confidence in M. de Treville, or whether he should only ask
him to give him CARTE BLANCHE for some secret affair. But M. de Treville
had always been so thoroughly his friend, had always been so devoted to
the king and queen, and hated the cardinal so cordially, that the young
man resolved to tell him everything.

“Did you ask for me, my good friend?” said M. de Treville.

“Yes, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan, lowering his voice, “and you will
pardon me, I hope, for having disturbed you when you know the importance
of my business.”

“Speak, then, I am all attention.”

“It concerns nothing less,” said d’Artagnan, “than the honor, perhaps
the life of the queen.”

“What did you say?” asked M. de Treville, glancing round to see if they
were surely alone, and then fixing his questioning look upon d’Artagnan.

“I say, monsieur, that chance has rendered me master of a secret--”

“Which you will guard, I hope, young man, as your life.”

“But which I must impart to you, monsieur, for you alone can assist me
in the mission I have just received from her Majesty.”

“Is this secret your own?”

“No, monsieur; it is her Majesty’s.”

“Are you authorized by her Majesty to communicate it to me?”

“No, monsieur, for, on the contrary, I am desired to preserve the
profoundest mystery.”

“Why, then, are you about to betray it to me?”

“Because, as I said, without you I can do nothing; and I am afraid you
will refuse me the favor I come to ask if you do not know to what end I
ask it.”

“Keep your secret, young man, and tell me what you wish.”

“I wish you to obtain for me, from Monsieur Dessessart, leave of absence
for fifteen days.”

“When?”

“This very night.”

“You leave Paris?”

“I am going on a mission.”

“May you tell me whither?”

“To London.”

“Has anyone an interest in preventing your arrival there?”

“The cardinal, I believe, would give the world to prevent my success.”

“And you are going alone?”

“I am going alone.”

“In that case you will not get beyond Bondy. I tell you so, by the faith
of de Treville.”

“How so?”

“You will be assassinated.”

“And I shall die in the performance of my duty.”

“But your mission will not be accomplished.”

“That is true,” replied d’Artagnan.

“Believe me,” continued Treville, “in enterprises of this kind, in order
that one may arrive, four must set out.”

“Ah, you are right, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan; “but you know Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis, and you know if I can dispose of them.”

“Without confiding to them the secret which I am not willing to know?”

“We are sworn, once for all, to implicit confidence and devotedness
against all proof. Besides, you can tell them that you have full
confidence in me, and they will not be more incredulous than you.”

“I can send to each of them leave of absence for fifteen days, that is
all--to Athos, whose wound still makes him suffer, to go to the waters
of Forges; to Porthos and Aramis to accompany their friend, whom they
are not willing to abandon in such a painful condition. Sending their
leave of absence will be proof enough that I authorize their journey.”

“Thanks, monsieur. You are a hundred times too good.”

“Begone, then, find them instantly, and let all be done tonight! Ha! But
first write your request to Dessessart. Perhaps you had a spy at your
heels; and your visit, if it should ever be known to the cardinal, will
thus seem legitimate.”

D’Artagnan drew up his request, and M. de Treville, on receiving it,
assured him that by two o’clock in the morning the four leaves of
absence should be at the respective domiciles of the travelers.

“Have the goodness to send mine to Athos’s residence. I should dread
some disagreeable encounter if I were to go home.”

“Be easy. Adieu, and a prosperous voyage. A PROPOS,” said M. de
Treville, calling him back.

D’Artagnan returned.

“Have you any money?”

D’Artagnan tapped the bag he had in his pocket.

“Enough?” asked M. de Treville.

“Three hundred pistoles.”

“Oh, plenty! That would carry you to the end of the world. Begone,
then!”

D’Artagnan saluted M. de Treville, who held out his hand to him;
d’Artagnan pressed it with a respect mixed with gratitude. Since his
first arrival at Paris, he had had constant occasion to honor this
excellent man, whom he had always found worthy, loyal, and great.

His first visit was to Aramis, at whose residence he had not been since
the famous evening on which he had followed Mme. Bonacieux. Still
further, he had seldom seen the young Musketeer; but every time he had
seen him, he had remarked a deep sadness imprinted on his countenance.

This evening, especially, Aramis was melancholy and thoughtful.
D’Artagnan asked some questions about this prolonged melancholy. Aramis
pleaded as his excuse a commentary upon the eighteenth chapter of St.
Augustine, which he was forced to write in Latin for the following week,
and which preoccupied him a good deal.

After the two friends had been chatting a few moments, a servant from M.
de Treville entered, bringing a sealed packet.

“What is that?” asked Aramis.

“The leave of absence Monsieur has asked for,” replied the lackey.

“For me! I have asked for no leave of absence.”

“Hold your tongue and take it!” said d’Artagnan. “And you, my friend,
there is a demipistole for your trouble; you will tell Monsieur de
Treville that Monsieur Aramis is very much obliged to him. Go.”

The lackey bowed to the ground and departed.

“What does all this mean?” asked Aramis.

“Pack up all you want for a journey of a fortnight, and follow me.”

“But I cannot leave Paris just now without knowing--”

Aramis stopped.

“What is become of her? I suppose you mean--” continued d’Artagnan.

“Become of whom?” replied Aramis.

“The woman who was here--the woman with the embroidered handkerchief.”

“Who told you there was a woman here?” replied Aramis, becoming as pale
as death.

“I saw her.”

“And you know who she is?”

“I believe I can guess, at least.”

“Listen!” said Aramis. “Since you appear to know so many things, can you
tell me what is become of that woman?”

“I presume that she has returned to Tours.”

“To Tours? Yes, that may be. You evidently know her. But why did she
return to Tours without telling me anything?”

“Because she was in fear of being arrested.”

“Why has she not written to me, then?”

“Because she was afraid of compromising you.”

“d’Artagnan, you restore me to life!” cried Aramis. “I fancied myself
despised, betrayed. I was so delighted to see her again! I could not
have believed she would risk her liberty for me, and yet for what other
cause could she have returned to Paris?”

“For the cause which today takes us to England.”

“And what is this cause?” demanded Aramis.

“Oh, you’ll know it someday, Aramis; but at present I must imitate the
discretion of ‘the doctor’s niece.’”

Aramis smiled, as he remembered the tale he had told his friends on a
certain evening. “Well, then, since she has left Paris, and you are sure
of it, d’Artagnan, nothing prevents me, and I am ready to follow you.
You say we are going--”

“To see Athos now, and if you will come thither, I beg you to make
haste, for we have lost much time already. A PROPOS, inform Bazin.”

“Will Bazin go with us?” asked Aramis.

“Perhaps so. At all events, it is best that he should follow us to
Athos’s.”

Aramis called Bazin, and, after having ordered him to join them at
Athos’s residence, said “Let us go then,” at the same time taking his
cloak, sword, and three pistols, opening uselessly two or three drawers
to see if he could not find stray coin. When well assured this search
was superfluous, he followed d’Artagnan, wondering to himself how this
young Guardsman should know so well who the lady was to whom he had
given hospitality, and that he should know better than himself what had
become of her.

Only as they went out Aramis placed his hand upon the arm of d’Artagnan,
and looking at him earnestly, “You have not spoken of this lady?” said
he.

“To nobody in the world.”

“Not even to Athos or Porthos?”

“I have not breathed a syllable to them.”

“Good enough!”

Tranquil on this important point, Aramis continued his way with
d’Artagnan, and both soon arrived at Athos’s dwelling. They found him
holding his leave of absence in one hand, and M. de Treville’s note in
the other.

“Can you explain to me what signify this leave of absence and this
letter, which I have just received?” said the astonished Athos.

My dear Athos,

I wish, as your health absolutely requires it, that you should rest for
a fortnight. Go, then, and take the waters of Forges, or any that may be
more agreeable to you, and recuperate yourself as quickly as possible.

Yours affectionate,

de Treville

“Well, this leave of absence and that letter mean that you must follow
me, Athos.”

“To the waters of Forges?”

“There or elsewhere.”

“In the king’s service?”

“Either the king’s or the queen’s. Are we not their Majesties’
servants?”

At that moment Porthos entered. “PARDIEU!” said he, “here is a strange
thing! Since when, I wonder, in the Musketeers, did they grant men leave
of absence without their asking for it?”

“Since,” said d’Artagnan, “they have friends who ask it for them.”

“Ah, ah!” said Porthos, “it appears there’s something fresh here.”

“Yes, we are going--” said Aramis.

“To what country?” demanded Porthos.

“My faith! I don’t know much about it,” said Athos. “Ask d’Artagnan.”

“To London, gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan.

“To London!” cried Porthos; “and what the devil are we going to do in
London?”

“That is what I am not at liberty to tell you, gentlemen; you must trust
to me.”

“But in order to go to London,” added Porthos, “money is needed, and I
have none.”

“Nor I,” said Aramis.

“Nor I,” said Athos.

“I have,” replied d’Artagnan, pulling out his treasure from his pocket,
and placing it on the table. “There are in this bag three hundred
pistoles. Let each take seventy-five; that is enough to take us to
London and back. Besides, make yourselves easy; we shall not all arrive
at London.”

“Why so?”

“Because, in all probability, some one of us will be left on the road.”

“Is this, then, a campaign upon which we are now entering?”

“One of a most dangerous kind, I give you notice.”

“Ah! But if we do risk being killed,” said Porthos, “at least I should
like to know what for.”

“You would be all the wiser,” said Athos.

“And yet,” said Aramis, “I am somewhat of Porthos’s opinion.”

“Is the king accustomed to give you such reasons? No. He says to you
jauntily, ‘Gentlemen, there is fighting going on in Gascony or in
Flanders; go and fight,’ and you go there. Why? You need give yourselves
no more uneasiness about this.”

“d’Artagnan is right,” said Athos; “here are our three leaves of absence
which came from Monsieur de Treville, and here are three hundred
pistoles which came from I don’t know where. So let us go and get killed
where we are told to go. Is life worth the trouble of so many questions?
D’Artagnan, I am ready to follow you.”

“And I also,” said Porthos.

“And I also,” said Aramis. “And, indeed, I am not sorry to quit Paris; I
had need of distraction.”

“Well, you will have distractions enough, gentlemen, be assured,” said
d’Artagnan.

“And, now, when are we to go?” asked Athos.

“Immediately,” replied d’Artagnan; “we have not a minute to lose.”

“Hello, Grimaud! Planchet! Mousqueton! Bazin!” cried the four young men,
calling their lackeys, “clean my boots, and fetch the horses from the
hotel.”

Each Musketeer was accustomed to leave at the general hotel, as at a
barrack, his own horse and that of his lackey. Planchet, Grimaud,
Mousqueton, and Bazin set off at full speed.

“Now let us lay down the plan of campaign,” said Porthos. “Where do we
go first?”

“To Calais,” said d’Artagnan; “that is the most direct line to London.”

“Well,” said Porthos, “this is my advice--”

“Speak!”

“Four men traveling together would be suspected. D’Artagnan will give
each of us his instructions. I will go by the way of Boulogne to clear
the way; Athos will set out two hours after, by that of Amiens; Aramis
will follow us by that of Noyon; as to d’Artagnan, he will go by what
route he thinks is best, in Planchet’s clothes, while Planchet will
follow us like d’Artagnan, in the uniform of the Guards.”

“Gentlemen,” said Athos, “my opinion is that it is not proper to allow
lackeys to have anything to do in such an affair. A secret may, by
chance, be betrayed by gentlemen; but it is almost always sold by
lackeys.”

“Porthos’s plan appears to me to be impracticable,” said d’Artagnan,
“inasmuch as I am myself ignorant of what instructions I can give you. I
am the bearer of a letter, that is all. I have not, and I cannot make
three copies of that letter, because it is sealed. We must, then, as it
appears to me, travel in company. This letter is here, in this pocket,”
and he pointed to the pocket which contained the letter. “If I should be
killed, one of you must take it, and continue the route; if he be
killed, it will be another’s turn, and so on--provided a single one
arrives, that is all that is required.”

“Bravo, d’Artagnan, your opinion is mine,” cried Athos, “Besides, we
must be consistent; I am going to take the waters, you will accompany
me. Instead of taking the waters of Forges, I go and take sea waters; I
am free to do so. If anyone wishes to stop us, I will show Monsieur de
Treville’s letter, and you will show your leaves of absence. If we are
attacked, we will defend ourselves; if we are tried, we will stoutly
maintain that we were only anxious to dip ourselves a certain number of
times in the sea. They would have an easy bargain of four isolated men;
whereas four men together make a troop. We will arm our four lackeys
with pistols and musketoons; if they send an army out against us, we
will give battle, and the survivor, as d’Artagnan says, will carry the
letter.”

“Well said,” cried Aramis; “you don’t often speak, Athos, but when you
do speak, it is like St. John of the Golden Mouth. I agree to Athos’s
plan. And you, Porthos?”

“I agree to it, too,” said Porthos, “if d’Artagnan approves of it.
D’Artagnan, being the bearer of the letter, is naturally the head of the
enterprise; let him decide, and we will execute.”

“Well,” said d’Artagnan, “I decide that we should adopt Athos’s plan,
and that we set off in half an hour.”

“Agreed!” shouted the three Musketeers in chorus.

Each one, stretching out his hand to the bag, took his seventy-five
pistoles, and made his preparations to set out at the time appointed.




20 THE JOURNEY


At two o’clock in the morning, our four adventurers left Paris by the
Barriere St. Denis. As long as it was dark they remained silent; in
spite of themselves they submitted to the influence of the obscurity,
and apprehended ambushes on every side.

With the first rays of day their tongues were loosened; with the sun
gaiety revived. It was like the eve of a battle; the heart beat, the
eyes laughed, and they felt that the life they were perhaps going to
lose, was, after all, a good thing.

Besides, the appearance of the caravan was formidable. The black horses
of the Musketeers, their martial carriage, with the regimental step of
these noble companions of the soldier, would have betrayed the most
strict incognito. The lackeys followed, armed to the teeth.

All went well till they arrived at Chantilly, which they reached about
eight o’clock in the morning. They needed breakfast, and alighted at the
door of an AUBERGE, recommended by a sign representing St. Martin giving
half his cloak to a poor man. They ordered the lackeys not to unsaddle
the horses, and to hold themselves in readiness to set off again
immediately.

They entered the common hall, and placed themselves at table. A
gentleman, who had just arrived by the route of Dammartin, was seated at
the same table, and was breakfasting. He opened the conversation about
rain and fine weather; the travelers replied. He drank to their good
health, and the travelers returned his politeness.

But at the moment Mousqueton came to announce that the horses were
ready, and they were arising from table, the stranger proposed to
Porthos to drink the health of the cardinal. Porthos replied that he
asked no better if the stranger, in his turn, would drink the health of
the king. The stranger cried that he acknowledged no other king but his
Eminence. Porthos called him drunk, and the stranger drew his sword.

“You have committed a piece of folly,” said Athos, “but it can’t be
helped; there is no drawing back. Kill the fellow, and rejoin us as soon
as you can.”

All three remounted their horses, and set out at a good pace, while
Porthos was promising his adversary to perforate him with all the
thrusts known in the fencing schools.

“There goes one!” cried Athos, at the end of five hundred paces.

“But why did that man attack Porthos rather than any other one of us?”
asked Aramis.

“Because, as Porthos was talking louder than the rest of us, he took him
for the chief,” said d’Artagnan.

“I always said that this cadet from Gascony was a well of wisdom,”
murmured Athos; and the travelers continued their route.

At Beauvais they stopped two hours, as well to breathe their horses a
little as to wait for Porthos. At the end of two hours, as Porthos did
not come, not any news of him, they resumed their journey.

At a league from Beauvais, where the road was confined between two high
banks, they fell in with eight or ten men who, taking advantage of the
road being unpaved in this spot, appeared to be employed in digging
holes and filling up the ruts with mud.

Aramis, not liking to soil his boots with this artificial mortar,
apostrophized them rather sharply. Athos wished to restrain him, but it
was too late. The laborers began to jeer the travelers and by their
insolence disturbed the equanimity even of the cool Athos, who urged on
his horse against one of them.

Then each of these men retreated as far as the ditch, from which each
took a concealed musket; the result was that our seven travelers were
outnumbered in weapons. Aramis received a ball which passed through his
shoulder, and Mousqueton another ball which lodged in the fleshy part
which prolongs the lower portion of the loins. Therefore Mousqueton
alone fell from his horse, not because he was severely wounded, but not
being able to see the wound, he judged it to be more serious than it
really was.

“It was an ambuscade!” shouted d’Artagnan. “Don’t waste a charge!
Forward!”

Aramis, wounded as he was, seized the mane of his horse, which carried
him on with the others. Mousqueton’s horse rejoined them, and galloped
by the side of his companions.

“That will serve us for a relay,” said Athos.

“I would rather have had a hat,” said d’Artagnan. “Mine was carried away
by a ball. By my faith, it is very fortunate that the letter was not in
it.”

“They’ll kill poor Porthos when he comes up,” said Aramis.

“If Porthos were on his legs, he would have rejoined us by this time,”
said Athos. “My opinion is that on the ground the drunken man was not
intoxicated.”

They continued at their best speed for two hours, although the horses
were so fatigued that it was to be feared they would soon refuse
service.

The travelers had chosen crossroads in the hope that they might meet
with less interruption; but at Crevecoeur, Aramis declared he could
proceed no farther. In fact, it required all the courage which he
concealed beneath his elegant form and polished manners to bear him so
far. He grew more pale every minute, and they were obliged to support
him on his horse. They lifted him off at the door of a cabaret, left
Bazin with him, who, besides, in a skirmish was more embarrassing than
useful, and set forward again in the hope of sleeping at Amiens.

“MORBLEU,” said Athos, as soon as they were again in motion, “reduced to
two masters and Grimaud and Planchet! MORBLEU! I won’t be their dupe, I
will answer for it. I will neither open my mouth nor draw my sword
between this and Calais. I swear by--”

“Don’t waste time in swearing,” said d’Artagnan; “let us gallop, if our
horses will consent.”

And the travelers buried their rowels in their horses’ flanks, who thus
vigorously stimulated recovered their energies. They arrived at Amiens
at midnight, and alighted at the AUBERGE of the Golden Lily.

The host had the appearance of as honest a man as any on earth. He
received the travelers with his candlestick in one hand and his cotton
nightcap in the other. He wished to lodge the two travelers each in a
charming chamber; but unfortunately these charming chambers were at the
opposite extremities of the hotel. D’Artagnan and Athos refused them.
The host replied that he had no other worthy of their Excellencies; but
the travelers declared they would sleep in the common chamber, each on a
mattress which might be thrown upon the ground. The host insisted; but
the travelers were firm, and he was obliged to do as they wished.

They had just prepared their beds and barricaded their door within, when
someone knocked at the yard shutter; they demanded who was there, and
recognizing the voices of their lackeys, opened the shutter. It was
indeed Planchet and Grimaud.

“Grimaud can take care of the horses,” said Planchet. “If you are
willing, gentlemen, I will sleep across your doorway, and you will then
be certain that nobody can reach you.”

“And on what will you sleep?” said d’Artagnan.

“Here is my bed,” replied Planchet, producing a bundle of straw.

“Come, then,” said d’Artagnan, “you are right. Mine host’s face does not
please me at all; it is too gracious.”

“Nor me either,” said Athos.

Planchet mounted by the window and installed himself across the doorway,
while Grimaud went and shut himself up in the stable, undertaking that
by five o’clock in the morning he and the four horses should be ready.

The night was quiet enough. Toward two o’clock in the morning somebody
endeavored to open the door; but as Planchet awoke in an instant and
cried, “Who goes there?” somebody replied that he was mistaken, and went
away.

At four o’clock in the morning they heard a terrible riot in the
stables. Grimaud had tried to waken the stable boys, and the stable boys
had beaten him. When they opened the window, they saw the poor lad lying
senseless, with his head split by a blow with a pitchfork.

Planchet went down into the yard, and wished to saddle the horses; but
the horses were all used up. Mousqueton’s horse which had traveled for
five or six hours without a rider the day before, might have been able
to pursue the journey; but by an inconceivable error the veterinary
surgeon, who had been sent for, as it appeared, to bleed one of the
host’s horses, had bled Mousqueton’s.

This began to be annoying. All these successive accidents were perhaps
the result of chance; but they might be the fruits of a plot. Athos and
d’Artagnan went out, while Planchet was sent to inquire if there were
not three horses for sale in the neighborhood. At the door stood two
horses, fresh, strong, and fully equipped. These would just have suited
them. He asked where their masters were, and was informed that they had
passed the night in the inn, and were then settling their bill with the
host.

Athos went down to pay the reckoning, while d’Artagnan and Planchet
stood at the street door. The host was in a lower and back room, to
which Athos was requested to go.

Athos entered without the least mistrust, and took out two pistoles to
pay the bill. The host was alone, seated before his desk, one of the
drawers of which was partly open. He took the money which Athos offered
to him, and after turning and turning it over and over in his hands,
suddenly cried out that it was bad, and that he would have him and his
companions arrested as forgers.

“You blackguard!” cried Athos, going toward him, “I’ll cut your ears
off!”

At the same instant, four men, armed to the teeth, entered by side
doors, and rushed upon Athos.

“I am taken!” shouted Athos, with all the power of his lungs. “Go on,
d’Artagnan! Spur, spur!” and he fired two pistols.

D’Artagnan and Planchet did not require twice bidding; they unfastened
the two horses that were waiting at the door, leaped upon them, buried
their spurs in their sides, and set off at full gallop.

“Do you know what has become of Athos?” asked d’Artagnan of Planchet, as
they galloped on.

“Ah, monsieur,” said Planchet, “I saw one fall at each of his two shots,
and he appeared to me, through the glass door, to be fighting with his
sword with the others.”

“Brave Athos!” murmured d’Artagnan, “and to think that we are compelled
to leave him; maybe the same fate awaits us two paces hence. Forward,
Planchet, forward! You are a brave fellow.”

“As I told you, monsieur,” replied Planchet, “Picards are found out by
being used. Besides, I am here in my own country, and that excites me.”

And both, with free use of the spur, arrived at St. Omer without drawing
bit. At St. Omer they breathed their horses with the bridles passed
under their arms for fear of accident, and ate a morsel from their hands
on the stones of the street, after they departed again.

At a hundred paces from the gates of Calais, d’Artagnan’s horse gave
out, and could not by any means be made to get up again, the blood
flowing from his eyes and his nose. There still remained Planchet’s
horse; but he stopped short, and could not be made to move a step.

Fortunately, as we have said, they were within a hundred paces of the
city; they left their two nags upon the high road, and ran toward the
quay. Planchet called his master’s attention to a gentleman who had just
arrived with his lackey, and only preceded them by about fifty paces.
They made all speed to come up to this gentleman, who appeared to be in
great haste. His boots were covered with dust, and he inquired if he
could not instantly cross over to England.

“Nothing would be more easy,” said the captain of a vessel ready to set
sail, “but this morning came an order to let no one leave without
express permission from the cardinal.”

“I have that permission,” said the gentleman, drawing the paper from his
pocket; “here it is.”

“Have it examined by the governor of the port,” said the shipmaster,
“and give me the preference.”

“Where shall I find the governor?”

“At his country house.”

“And that is situated?”

“At a quarter of a league from the city. Look, you may see it from
here--at the foot of that little hill, that slated roof.”

“Very well,” said the gentleman. And, with his lackey, he took the road
to the governor’s country house.

D’Artagnan and Planchet followed the gentleman at a distance of five
hundred paces. Once outside the city, d’Artagnan overtook the gentleman
as he was entering a little wood.

“Monsieur, you appear to be in great haste?”

“No one can be more so, monsieur.”

“I am sorry for that,” said d’Artagnan; “for as I am in great haste
likewise, I wish to beg you to render me a service.”

“What?”

“To let me sail first.”

“That’s impossible,” said the gentleman; “I have traveled sixty leagues
in forty hours, and by tomorrow at midday I must be in London.”

“I have performed that same distance in forty hours, and by ten o’clock
in the morning I must be in London.”

“Very sorry, monsieur; but I was here first, and will not sail second.”

“I am sorry, too, monsieur; but I arrived second, and must sail first.”

“The king’s service!” said the gentleman.

“My own service!” said d’Artagnan.

“But this is a needless quarrel you seek with me, as it seems to me.”

“PARBLEU! What do you desire it to be?”

“What do you want?”

“Would you like to know?”

“Certainly.”

“Well, then, I wish that order of which you are bearer, seeing that I
have not one of my own and must have one.”

“You jest, I presume.”

“I never jest.”

“Let me pass!”

“You shall not pass.”

“My brave young man, I will blow out your brains. HOLA, Lubin, my
pistols!”

“Planchet,” called out d’Artagnan, “take care of the lackey; I will
manage the master.”

Planchet, emboldened by the first exploit, sprang upon Lubin; and being
strong and vigorous, he soon got him on the broad of his back, and
placed his knee upon his breast.

“Go on with your affair, monsieur,” cried Planchet; “I have finished
mine.”

Seeing this, the gentleman drew his sword, and sprang upon d’Artagnan;
but he had too strong an adversary. In three seconds d’Artagnan had
wounded him three times, exclaiming at each thrust, “One for Athos, one
for Porthos; and one for Aramis!”

At the third hit the gentleman fell like a log. D’Artagnan believed him
to be dead, or at least insensible, and went toward him for the purpose
of taking the order; but the moment he extended his hand to search for
it, the wounded man, who had not dropped his sword, plunged the point
into d’Artagnan’s breast, crying, “One for you!”

“And one for me--the best for last!” cried d’Artagnan, furious, nailing
him to the earth with a fourth thrust through his body.

This time the gentleman closed his eyes and fainted. D’Artagnan searched
his pockets, and took from one of them the order for the passage. It was
in the name of Comte de Wardes.

Then, casting a glance on the handsome young man, who was scarcely
twenty-five years of age, and whom he was leaving in his gore, deprived
of sense and perhaps dead, he gave a sigh for that unaccountable destiny
which leads men to destroy each other for the interests of people who
are strangers to them and who often do not even know that they exist.
But he was soon aroused from these reflections by Lubin, who uttered
loud cries and screamed for help with all his might.

Planchet grasped him by the throat, and pressed as hard as he could.
“Monsieur,” said he, “as long as I hold him in this manner, he can’t
cry, I’ll be bound; but as soon as I let go he will howl again. I know
him for a Norman, and Normans are obstinate.”

In fact, tightly held as he was, Lubin endeavored still to cry out.

“Stay!” said d’Artagnan; and taking out his handkerchief, he gagged him.

“Now,” said Planchet, “let us bind him to a tree.”

This being properly done, they drew the Comte de Wardes close to his
servant; and as night was approaching, and as the wounded man and the
bound man were at some little distance within the wood, it was evident
they were likely to remain there till the next day.

“And now,” said d’Artagnan, “to the Governor’s.”

“But you are wounded, it seems,” said Planchet.

“Oh, that’s nothing! Let us attend to what is more pressing first, and
then we will attend to my wound; besides, it does not seem very
dangerous.”

And they both set forward as fast as they could toward the country house
of the worthy functionary.

The Comte de Wardes was announced, and d’Artagnan was introduced.

“You have an order signed by the cardinal?” said the governor.

“Yes, monsieur,” replied d’Artagnan; “here it is.”

“Ah, ah! It is quite regular and explicit,” said the governor.

“Most likely,” said d’Artagnan; “I am one of his most faithful
servants.”

“It appears that his Eminence is anxious to prevent someone from
crossing to England?”

“Yes; a certain d’Artagnan, a Bearnese gentleman who left Paris in
company with three of his friends, with the intention of going to
London.”

“Do you know him personally?” asked the governor.

“Whom?”

“This d’Artagnan.”

“Perfectly well.”

“Describe him to me, then.”

“Nothing more easy.”

And d’Artagnan gave, feature for feature, a description of the Comte de
Wardes.

“Is he accompanied?”

“Yes; by a lackey named Lubin.”

“We will keep a sharp lookout for them; and if we lay hands on them his
Eminence may be assured they will be reconducted to Paris under a good
escort.”

“And by doing so, Monsieur the Governor,” said d’Artagnan, “you will
deserve well of the cardinal.”

“Shall you see him on your return, Monsieur Count?”

“Without a doubt.”

“Tell him, I beg you, that I am his humble servant.”

“I will not fail.”

Delighted with this assurance the governor countersigned the passport
and delivered it to d’Artagnan. D’Artagnan lost no time in useless
compliments. He thanked the governor, bowed, and departed. Once outside,
he and Planchet set off as fast as they could; and by making a long
detour avoided the wood and reentered the city by another gate.

The vessel was quite ready to sail, and the captain was waiting on the
wharf. “Well?” said he, on perceiving d’Artagnan.

“Here is my pass countersigned,” said the latter.

“And that other gentleman?

“He will not go today,” said d’Artagnan; “but here, I’ll pay you for us
two.”

“In that case let us go,” said the shipmaster.

“Let us go,” repeated d’Artagnan.

He leaped with Planchet into the boat, and five minutes after they were
on board. It was time; for they had scarcely sailed half a league, when
d’Artagnan saw a flash and heard a detonation. It was the cannon which
announced the closing of the port.

He had now leisure to look to his wound. Fortunately, as d’Artagnan had
thought, it was not dangerous. The point of the sword had touched a rib,
and glanced along the bone. Still further, his shirt had stuck to the
wound, and he had lost only a few drops of blood.

D’Artagnan was worn out with fatigue. A mattress was laid upon the deck
for him. He threw himself upon it, and fell asleep.

On the morrow, at break of day, they were still three or four leagues
from the coast of England. The breeze had been so light all night, they
had made but little progress. At ten o’clock the vessel cast anchor in
the harbor of Dover, and at half past ten d’Artagnan placed his foot on
English land, crying, “Here I am at last!”

But that was not all; they must get to London. In England the post was
well served. D’Artagnan and Planchet took each a post horse, and a
postillion rode before them. In a few hours they were in the capital.

D’Artagnan did not know London; he did not know a word of English; but
he wrote the name of Buckingham on a piece of paper, and everyone
pointed out to him the way to the duke’s hotel.

The duke was at Windsor hunting with the king. D’Artagnan inquired for
the confidential valet of the duke, who, having accompanied him in all
his voyages, spoke French perfectly well; he told him that he came from
Paris on an affair of life and death, and that he must speak with his
master instantly.

The confidence with which d’Artagnan spoke convinced Patrick, which was
the name of this minister of the minister. He ordered two horses to be
saddled, and himself went as guide to the young Guardsman. As for
Planchet, he had been lifted from his horse as stiff as a rush; the poor
lad’s strength was almost exhausted. D’Artagnan seemed iron.

On their arrival at the castle they learned that Buckingham and the king
were hawking in the marshes two or three leagues away. In twenty minutes
they were on the spot named. Patrick soon caught the sound of his
master’s voice calling his falcon.

“Whom must I announce to my Lord Duke?” asked Patrick.

“The young man who one evening sought a quarrel with him on the Pont
Neuf, opposite the Samaritaine.”

“A singular introduction!”

“You will find that it is as good as another.”

Patrick galloped off, reached the duke, and announced to him in the
terms directed that a messenger awaited him.

Buckingham at once remembered the circumstance, and suspecting that
something was going on in France of which it was necessary he should be
informed, he only took the time to inquire where the messenger was, and
recognizing from afar the uniform of the Guards, he put his horse into a
gallop, and rode straight up to d’Artagnan. Patrick discreetly kept in
the background.

“No misfortune has happened to the queen?” cried Buckingham, the instant
he came up, throwing all his fear and love into the question.

“I believe not; nevertheless I believe she runs some great peril from
which your Grace alone can extricate her.”

“I!” cried Buckingham. “What is it? I should be too happy to be of any
service to her. Speak, speak!”

“Take this letter,” said d’Artagnan.

“This letter! From whom comes this letter?”

“From her Majesty, as I think.”

“From her Majesty!” said Buckingham, becoming so pale that d’Artagnan
feared he would faint as he broke the seal.

“What is this rent?” said he, showing d’Artagnan a place where it had
been pierced through.

“Ah,” said d’Artagnan, “I did not see that; it was the sword of the
Comte de Wardes which made that hole, when he gave me a good thrust in
the breast.”

“You are wounded?” asked Buckingham, as he opened the letter.

“Oh, nothing but a scratch,” said d’Artagnan.

“Just heaven, what have I read?” cried the duke. “Patrick, remain here,
or rather join the king, wherever he may be, and tell his Majesty that I
humbly beg him to excuse me, but an affair of the greatest importance
recalls me to London. Come, monsieur, come!” and both set off towards
the capital at full gallop.




21 THE COUNTESS DE WINTER


As they rode along, the duke endeavored to draw from d’Artagnan, not all
that had happened, but what d’Artagnan himself knew. By adding all that
he heard from the mouth of the young man to his own remembrances, he was
enabled to form a pretty exact idea of a position of the seriousness of
which, for the rest, the queen’s letter, short but explicit, gave him
the clue. But that which astonished him most was that the cardinal, so
deeply interested in preventing this young man from setting his foot in
England, had not succeeded in arresting him on the road. It was then,
upon the manifestation of this astonishment, that d’Artagnan related to
him the precaution taken, and how, thanks to the devotion of his three
friends, whom he had left scattered and bleeding on the road, he had
succeeded in coming off with a single sword thrust, which had pierced
the queen’s letter and for which he had repaid M. de Wardes with such
terrible coin. While he was listening to this recital, delivered with
the greatest simplicity, the duke looked from time to time at the young
man with astonishment, as if he could not comprehend how so much
prudence, courage, and devotedness could be allied with a countenance
which indicated not more than twenty years.

The horses went like the wind, and in a few minutes they were at the
gates of London. D’Artagnan imagined that on arriving in town the duke
would slacken his pace, but it was not so. He kept on his way at the
same rate, heedless about upsetting those whom he met on the road. In
fact, in crossing the city two or three accidents of this kind happened;
but Buckingham did not even turn his head to see what became of those he
had knocked down. D’Artagnan followed him amid cries which strongly
resembled curses.

On entering the court of his hotel, Buckingham sprang from his horse,
and without thinking what became of the animal, threw the bridle on his
neck, and sprang toward the vestibule. D’Artagnan did the same, with a
little more concern, however, for the noble creatures, whose merits he
fully appreciated; but he had the satisfaction of seeing three or four
grooms run from the kitchens and the stables, and busy themselves with
the steeds.

The duke walked so fast that d’Artagnan had some trouble in keeping up
with him. He passed through several apartments, of an elegance of which
even the greatest nobles of France had not even an idea, and arrived at
length in a bedchamber which was at once a miracle of taste and of
richness. In the alcove of this chamber was a door concealed in the
tapestry which the duke opened with a little gold key which he wore
suspended from his neck by a chain of the same metal. With discretion
d’Artagnan remained behind; but at the moment when Buckingham crossed
the threshold, he turned round, and seeing the hesitation of the young
man, “Come in!” cried he, “and if you have the good fortune to be
admitted to her Majesty’s presence, tell her what you have seen.”

Encouraged by this invitation, d’Artagnan followed the duke, who closed
the door after them. The two found themselves in a small chapel covered
with a tapestry of Persian silk worked with gold, and brilliantly
lighted with a vast number of candles. Over a species of altar, and
beneath a canopy of blue velvet, surmounted by white and red plumes, was
a full-length portrait of Anne of Austria, so perfect in its resemblance
that d’Artagnan uttered a cry of surprise on beholding it. One might
believe the queen was about to speak. On the altar, and beneath the
portrait, was the casket containing the diamond studs.

The duke approached the altar, knelt as a priest might have done before
a crucifix, and opened the casket. “There,” said he, drawing from the
casket a large bow of blue ribbon all sparkling with diamonds, “there
are the precious studs which I have taken an oath should be buried with
me. The queen gave them to me, the queen requires them again. Her will
be done, like that of God, in all things.”

Then, he began to kiss, one after the other, those dear studs with which
he was about to part. All at once he uttered a terrible cry.

“What is the matter?” exclaimed d’Artagnan, anxiously; “what has
happened to you, my Lord?”

“All is lost!” cried Buckingham, becoming as pale as a corpse; “two of
the studs are wanting, there are only ten.”

“Can you have lost them, my Lord, or do you think they have been
stolen?”

“They have been stolen,” replied the duke, “and it is the cardinal who
has dealt this blow. Hold; see! The ribbons which held them have been
cut with scissors.”

“If my Lord suspects they have been stolen, perhaps the person who stole
them still has them in his hands.”

“Wait, wait!” said the duke. “The only time I have worn these studs was
at a ball given by the king eight days ago at Windsor. The Comtesse de
Winter, with whom I had quarreled, became reconciled to me at that ball.
That reconciliation was nothing but the vengeance of a jealous woman. I
have never seen her from that day. The woman is an agent of the
cardinal.”

“He has agents, then, throughout the world?” cried d’Artagnan.

“Oh, yes,” said Buckingham, grating his teeth with rage. “Yes, he is a
terrible antagonist. But when is this ball to take place?”

“Monday next.”

“Monday next! Still five days before us. That’s more time than we want.
Patrick!” cried the duke, opening the door of the chapel, “Patrick!” His
confidential valet appeared.

“My jeweler and my secretary.”

The valet went out with a mute promptitude which showed him accustomed
to obey blindly and without reply.

But although the jeweler had been mentioned first, it was the secretary
who first made his appearance. This was simply because he lived in the
hotel. He found Buckingham seated at a table in his bedchamber, writing
orders with his own hand.

“Mr. Jackson,” said he, “go instantly to the Lord Chancellor, and tell
him that I charge him with the execution of these orders. I wish them to
be promulgated immediately.”

“But, my Lord, if the Lord Chancellor interrogates me upon the motives
which may have led your Grace to adopt such an extraordinary measure,
what shall I reply?”

“That such is my pleasure, and that I answer for my will to no man.”

“Will that be the answer,” replied the secretary, smiling, “which he
must transmit to his Majesty if, by chance, his Majesty should have the
curiosity to know why no vessel is to leave any of the ports of Great
Britain?”

“You are right, Mr. Jackson,” replied Buckingham. “He will say, in that
case, to the king that I am determined on war, and that this measure is
my first act of hostility against France.”

The secretary bowed and retired.

“We are safe on that side,” said Buckingham, turning toward d’Artagnan.
“If the studs are not yet gone to Paris, they will not arrive till after
you.”

“How so?”

“I have just placed an embargo on all vessels at present in his
Majesty’s ports, and without particular permission, not one dare lift an
anchor.”

D’Artagnan looked with stupefaction at a man who thus employed the
unlimited power with which he was clothed by the confidence of a king in
the prosecution of his intrigues. Buckingham saw by the expression of
the young man’s face what was passing in his mind, and he smiled.

“Yes,” said he, “yes, Anne of Austria is my true queen. Upon a word from
her, I would betray my country, I would betray my king, I would betray
my God. She asked me not to send the Protestants of La Rochelle the
assistance I promised them; I have not done so. I broke my word, it is
true; but what signifies that? I obeyed my love; and have I not been
richly paid for that obedience? It was to that obedience I owe her
portrait.”

D’Artagnan was amazed to note by what fragile and unknown threads the
destinies of nations and the lives of men are suspended. He was lost in
these reflections when the goldsmith entered. He was an Irishman--one of
the most skillful of his craft, and who himself confessed that he gained
a hundred thousand livres a year by the Duke of Buckingham.

“Mr. O’Reilly,” said the duke, leading him into the chapel, “look at
these diamond studs, and tell me what they are worth apiece.”

The goldsmith cast a glance at the elegant manner in which they were
set, calculated, one with another, what the diamonds were worth, and
without hesitation said, “Fifteen hundred pistoles each, my Lord.”

“How many days would it require to make two studs exactly like them? You
see there are two wanting.”

“Eight days, my Lord.”

“I will give you three thousand pistoles apiece if I can have them by
the day after tomorrow.”

“My Lord, they shall be yours.”

“You are a jewel of a man, Mr. O’Reilly; but that is not all. These
studs cannot be trusted to anybody; it must be done in the palace.”

“Impossible, my Lord! There is no one but myself can so execute them
that one cannot tell the new from the old.”

“Therefore, my dear Mr. O’Reilly, you are my prisoner. And if you wish
ever to leave my palace, you cannot; so make the best of it. Name to me
such of your workmen as you need, and point out the tools they must
bring.”

The goldsmith knew the duke. He knew all objection would be useless, and
instantly determined how to act.

“May I be permitted to inform my wife?” said he.

“Oh, you may even see her if you like, my dear Mr. O’Reilly. Your
captivity shall be mild, be assured; and as every inconvenience deserves
its indemnification, here is, in addition to the price of the studs, an
order for a thousand pistoles, to make you forget the annoyance I cause
you.”

D’Artagnan could not get over the surprise created in him by this
minister, who thus open-handed, sported with men and millions.

As to the goldsmith, he wrote to his wife, sending her the order for the
thousand pistoles, and charging her to send him, in exchange, his most
skillful apprentice, an assortment of diamonds, of which he gave the
names and the weight, and the necessary tools.

Buckingham conducted the goldsmith to the chamber destined for him, and
which, at the end of half an hour, was transformed into a workshop. Then
he placed a sentinel at each door, with an order to admit nobody upon
any pretense but his VALET DE CHAMBRE, Patrick. We need not add that the
goldsmith, O’Reilly, and his assistant, were prohibited from going out
under any pretext. This point, settled, the duke turned to d’Artagnan.
“Now, my young friend,” said he, “England is all our own. What do you
wish for? What do you desire?”

“A bed, my Lord,” replied d’Artagnan. “At present, I confess, that is
the thing I stand most in need of.”

Buckingham gave d’Artagnan a chamber adjoining his own. He wished to
have the young man at hand--not that he at all mistrusted him, but for
the sake of having someone to whom he could constantly talk of the
queen.

In one hour after, the ordinance was published in London that no vessel
bound for France should leave port, not even the packet boat with
letters. In the eyes of everybody this was a declaration of war between
the two kingdoms.

On the day after the morrow, by eleven o’clock, the two diamond studs
were finished, and they were so completely imitated, so perfectly alike,
that Buckingham could not tell the new ones from the old ones, and
experts in such matters would have been deceived as he was. He
immediately called d’Artagnan. “Here,” said he to him, “are the diamond
studs that you came to bring; and be my witness that I have done all
that human power could do.”

“Be satisfied, my Lord, I will tell all that I have seen. But does your
Grace mean to give me the studs without the casket?”

“The casket would encumber you. Besides, the casket is the more precious
from being all that is left to me. You will say that I keep it.”

“I will perform your commission, word for word, my Lord.”

“And now,” resumed Buckingham, looking earnestly at the young man, “how
shall I ever acquit myself of the debt I owe you?”

D’Artagnan blushed up to the whites of his eyes. He saw that the duke
was searching for a means of making him accept something and the idea
that the blood of his friends and himself was about to be paid for with
English gold was strangely repugnant to him.

“Let us understand each other, my Lord,” replied d’Artagnan, “and let us
make things clear beforehand in order that there may be no mistake. I am
in the service of the King and Queen of France, and form part of the
company of Monsieur Dessessart, who, as well as his brother-in-law,
Monsieur de Treville, is particularly attached to their Majesties. What
I have done, then, has been for the queen, and not at all for your
Grace. And still further, it is very probable I should not have done
anything of this, if it had not been to make myself agreeable to someone
who is my lady, as the queen is yours.”

“Yes,” said the duke, smiling, “and I even believe that I know that
other person; it is--”

“My Lord, I have not named her!” interrupted the young man, warmly.

“That is true,” said the duke; “and it is to this person I am bound to
discharge my debt of gratitude.”

“You have said, my Lord; for truly, at this moment when there is
question of war, I confess to you that I see nothing in your Grace but
an Englishman, and consequently an enemy whom I should have much greater
pleasure in meeting on the field of battle than in the park at Windsor
or the corridors of the Louvre--all which, however, will not prevent me
from executing to the very point my commission or from laying down my
life, if there be need of it, to accomplish it; but I repeat it to your
Grace, without your having personally on that account more to thank me
for in this second interview than for what I did for you in the first.”

“We say, ‘Proud as a Scotsman,’” murmured the Duke of Buckingham.

“And we say, ‘Proud as a Gascon,’” replied d’Artagnan. “The Gascons are
the Scots of France.”

D’Artagnan bowed to the duke, and was retiring.

“Well, are you going away in that manner? Where, and how?”

“That’s true!”

“Fore Gad, these Frenchmen have no consideration!”

“I had forgotten that England was an island, and that you were the king
of it.”

“Go to the riverside, ask for the brig SUND, and give this letter to the
captain; he will convey you to a little port, where certainly you are
not expected, and which is ordinarily only frequented by fishermen.”

“The name of that port?”

“St. Valery; but listen. When you have arrived there you will go to a
mean tavern, without a name and without a sign--a mere fisherman’s hut.
You cannot be mistaken; there is but one.”

“Afterward?”

“You will ask for the host, and will repeat to him the word ‘Forward!’”

“Which means?”

“In French, EN AVANT. It is the password. He will give you a horse all
saddled, and will point out to you the road you ought to take. You will
find, in the same way, four relays on your route. If you will give at
each of these relays your address in Paris, the four horses will follow
you thither. You already know two of them, and you appeared to
appreciate them like a judge. They were those we rode on; and you may
rely upon me for the others not being inferior to them. These horses are
equipped for the field. However proud you may be, you will not refuse to
accept one of them, and to request your three companions to accept the
others--that is, in order to make war against us. Besides, the end
justified the means, as you Frenchmen say, does it not?”

“Yes, my Lord, I accept them,” said d’Artagnan; “and if it please God,
we will make a good use of your presents.”

“Well, now, your hand, young man. Perhaps we shall soon meet on the
field of battle; but in the meantime we shall part good friends, I
hope.”

“Yes, my Lord; but with the hope of soon becoming enemies.”

“Be satisfied; I promise you that.”

“I depend upon your word, my Lord.”

D’Artagnan bowed to the duke, and made his way as quickly as possible to
the riverside. Opposite the Tower of London he found the vessel that had
been named to him, delivered his letter to the captain, who after having
it examined by the governor of the port made immediate preparations to
sail.

Fifty vessels were waiting to set out. Passing alongside one of them,
d’Artagnan fancied he perceived on board it the woman of Meung--the same
whom the unknown gentleman had called Milady, and whom d’Artagnan had
thought so handsome; but thanks to the current of the stream and a fair
wind, his vessel passed so quickly that he had little more than a
glimpse of her.

The next day about nine o’clock in the morning, he landed at St. Valery.
D’Artagnan went instantly in search of the inn, and easily discovered it
by the riotous noise which resounded from it. War between England and
France was talked of as near and certain, and the jolly sailors were
having a carousal.

D’Artagnan made his way through the crowd, advanced toward the host, and
pronounced the word “Forward!” The host instantly made him a sign to
follow, went out with him by a door which opened into a yard, led him to
the stable, where a saddled horse awaited him, and asked him if he stood
in need of anything else.

“I want to know the route I am to follow,” said d’Artagnan.

“Go from hence to Blangy, and from Blangy to Neufchatel. At Neufchatel,
go to the tavern of the Golden Harrow, give the password to the
landlord, and you will find, as you have here, a horse ready saddled.”

“Have I anything to pay?” demanded d’Artagnan.

“Everything is paid,” replied the host, “and liberally. Begone, and may
God guide you!”

“Amen!” cried the young man, and set off at full gallop.

Four hours later he was in Neufchatel. He strictly followed the
instructions he had received. At Neufchatel, as at St. Valery, he found
a horse quite ready and awaiting him. He was about to remove the pistols
from the saddle he had quit to the one he was about to fill, but he
found the holsters furnished with similar pistols.

“Your address at Paris?”

“Hotel of the Guards, company of Dessessart.”

“Enough,” replied the questioner.

“Which route must I take?” demanded d’Artagnan, in his turn.

“That of Rouen; but you will leave the city on your right. You must stop
at the little village of Eccuis, in which there is but one tavern--the
Shield of France. Don’t condemn it from appearances; you will find a
horse in the stables quite as good as this.”

“The same password?”

“Exactly.”

“Adieu, master!”

“A good journey, gentlemen! Do you want anything?”

D’Artagnan shook his head, and set off at full speed. At Eccuis, the
same scene was repeated. He found as provident a host and a fresh horse.
He left his address as he had done before, and set off again at the same
pace for Pontoise. At Pontoise he changed his horse for the last time,
and at nine o’clock galloped into the yard of Treville’s hotel. He had
made nearly sixty leagues in little more than twelve hours.

M de Treville received him as if he had seen him that same morning;
only, when pressing his hand a little more warmly than usual, he
informed him that the company of Dessessart was on duty at the Louvre,
and that he might repair at once to his post.




22 THE BALLET OF LA MERLAISON


On the morrow, nothing was talked of in Paris but the ball which the
aldermen of the city were to give to the king and queen, and in which
their Majesties were to dance the famous La Merlaison--the favorite
ballet of the king.

Eight days had been occupied in preparations at the Hotel de Ville for
this important evening. The city carpenters had erected scaffolds upon
which the invited ladies were to be placed; the city grocer had
ornamented the chambers with two hundred FLAMBEAUX of white wax, a piece
of luxury unheard of at that period; and twenty violins were ordered,
and the price for them fixed at double the usual rate, upon condition,
said the report, that they should be played all night.

At ten o’clock in the morning the Sieur de la Coste, ensign in the
king’s Guards, followed by two officers and several archers of that
body, came to the city registrar, named Clement, and demanded of him all
the keys of the rooms and offices of the hotel. These keys were given up
to him instantly. Each of them had ticket attached to it, by which it
might be recognized; and from that moment the Sieur de la Coste was
charged with the care of all the doors and all the avenues.

At eleven o’clock came in his turn Duhallier, captain of the Guards,
bringing with him fifty archers, who were distributed immediately
through the Hotel de Ville, at the doors assigned them.

At three o’clock came two companies of the Guards, one French, the other
Swiss. The company of French guards was composed of half of M.
Duhallier’s men and half of M. Dessessart’s men.

At six in the evening the guests began to come. As fast as they entered,
they were placed in the grand saloon, on the platforms prepared for
them.

At nine o’clock Madame la Premiere Presidente arrived. As next to the
queen, she was the most considerable personage of the fete, she was
received by the city officials, and placed in a box opposite to that
which the queen was to occupy.

At ten o’clock, the king’s collation, consisting of preserves and other
delicacies, was prepared in the little room on the side of the church of
St. Jean, in front of the silver buffet of the city, which was guarded
by four archers.

At midnight great cries and loud acclamations were heard. It was the
king, who was passing through the streets which led from the Louvre to
the Hotel de Ville, and which were all illuminated with colored
lanterns.

Immediately the aldermen, clothed in their cloth robes and preceded by
six sergeants, each holding a FLAMBEAU in his hand, went to attend upon
the king, whom they met on the steps, where the provost of the merchants
made him the speech of welcome--a compliment to which his Majesty
replied with an apology for coming so late, laying the blame upon the
cardinal, who had detained him till eleven o’clock, talking of affairs
of state.

His Majesty, in full dress, was accompanied by his royal Highness, M. le
Comte de Soissons, by the Grand Prior, by the Duc de Longueville, by the
Duc d’Euboeuf, by the Comte d’Harcourt, by the Comte de la Roche-Guyon,
by M. de Liancourt, by M. de Baradas, by the Comte de Cramail, and by
the Chevalier de Souveray. Everybody noticed that the king looked dull
and preoccupied.

A private room had been prepared for the king and another for Monsieur.
In each of these closets were placed masquerade dresses. The same had
been done for the queen and Madame the President. The nobles and ladies
of their Majesties’ suites were to dress, two by two, in chambers
prepared for the purpose. Before entering his closet the king desired to
be informed the moment the cardinal arrived.

Half an hour after the entrance of the king, fresh acclamations were
heard; these announced the arrival of the queen. The aldermen did as
they had done before, and preceded by their sergeants, advanced to
receive their illustrious guest. The queen entered the great hall; and
it was remarked that, like the king, she looked dull and even weary.

At the moment she entered, the curtain of a small gallery which to that
time had been closed, was drawn, and the pale face of the cardinal
appeared, he being dressed as a Spanish cavalier. His eyes were fixed
upon those of the queen, and a smile of terrible joy passed over his
lips; the queen did not wear her diamond studs.

The queen remained for a short time to receive the compliments of the
city dignitaries and to reply to the salutations of the ladies. All at
once the king appeared with the cardinal at one of the doors of the
hall. The cardinal was speaking to him in a low voice, and the king was
very pale.

The king made his way through the crowd without a mask, and the ribbons
of his doublet scarcely tied. He went straight to the queen, and in an
altered voice said, “Why, madame, have you not thought proper to wear
your diamond studs, when you know it would give me so much
gratification?”

The queen cast a glance around her, and saw the cardinal behind, with a
diabolical smile on his countenance.

“Sire,” replied the queen, with a faltering voice, “because, in the
midst of such a crowd as this, I feared some accident might happen to
them.”

“And you were wrong, madame. If I made you that present it was that you
might adorn yourself therewith. I tell you that you were wrong.”

The voice of the king was tremulous with anger. Everybody looked and
listened with astonishment, comprehending nothing of what passed.

“Sire,” said the queen, “I can send for them to the Louvre, where they
are, and thus your Majesty’s wishes will be complied with.”

“Do so, madame, do so, and that at once; for within an hour the ballet
will commence.”

The queen bent in token of submission, and followed the ladies who were
to conduct her to her room. On his part the king returned to his
apartment.

There was a moment of trouble and confusion in the assembly. Everybody
had remarked that something had passed between the king and queen; but
both of them had spoken so low that everybody, out of respect, withdrew
several steps, so that nobody had heard anything. The violins began to
sound with all their might, but nobody listened to them.

The king came out first from his room. He was in a most elegant hunting
costume; and Monsieur and the other nobles were dressed like him. This
was the costume that best became the king. So dressed, he really
appeared the first gentleman of his kingdom.

The cardinal drew near to the king, and placed in his hand a small
casket. The king opened it, and found in it two diamond studs.

“What does this mean?” demanded he of the cardinal.

“Nothing,” replied the latter; “only, if the queen has the studs, which
I very much doubt, count them, sire, and if you only find ten, ask her
Majesty who can have stolen from her the two studs that are here.”

The king looked at the cardinal as if to interrogate him; but he had not
time to address any question to him--a cry of admiration burst from
every mouth. If the king appeared to be the first gentleman of his
kingdom, the queen was without doubt the most beautiful woman in France.

It is true that the habit of a huntress became her admirably. She wore a
beaver hat with blue feathers, a surtout of gray-pearl velvet, fastened
with diamond clasps, and a petticoat of blue satin, embroidered with
silver. On her left shoulder sparkled the diamond studs, on a bow of the
same color as the plumes and the petticoat.

The king trembled with joy and the cardinal with vexation; although,
distant as they were from the queen, they could not count the studs. The
queen had them. The only question was, had she ten or twelve?

At that moment the violins sounded the signal for the ballet. The king
advanced toward Madame the President, with whom he was to dance, and his
Highness Monsieur with the queen. They took their places, and the ballet
began.

The king danced facing the queen, and every time he passed by her, he
devoured with his eyes those studs of which he could not ascertain the
number. A cold sweat covered the brow of the cardinal.

The ballet lasted an hour, and had sixteen ENTREES. The ballet ended
amid the applause of the whole assemblage, and everyone reconducted his
lady to her place; but the king took advantage of the privilege he had
of leaving his lady, to advance eagerly toward the queen.

“I thank you, madame,” said he, “for the deference you have shown to my
wishes, but I think you want two of the studs, and I bring them back to
you.”

With these words he held out to the queen the two studs the cardinal had
given him.

“How, sire?” cried the young queen, affecting surprise, “you are giving
me, then, two more: I shall have fourteen.”

In fact the king counted them, and the twelve studs were all on her
Majesty’s shoulder.

The king called the cardinal.

“What does this mean, Monsieur Cardinal?” asked the king in a severe
tone.

“This means, sire,” replied the cardinal, “that I was desirous of
presenting her Majesty with these two studs, and that not daring to
offer them myself, I adopted this means of inducing her to accept them.”

“And I am the more grateful to your Eminence,” replied Anne of Austria,
with a smile that proved she was not the dupe of this ingenious
gallantry, “from being certain that these two studs alone have cost you
as much as all the others cost his Majesty.”

Then saluting the king and the cardinal, the queen resumed her way to
the chamber in which she had dressed, and where she was to take off her
costume.

The attention which we have been obliged to give, during the
commencement of the chapter, to the illustrious personages we have
introduced into it, has diverted us for an instant from him to whom Anne
of Austria owed the extraordinary triumph she had obtained over the
cardinal; and who, confounded, unknown, lost in the crowd gathered at
one of the doors, looked on at this scene, comprehensible only to four
persons--the king, the queen, his Eminence, and himself.

The queen had just regained her chamber, and d’Artagnan was about to
retire, when he felt his shoulder lightly touched. He turned and saw a
young woman, who made him a sign to follow her. The face of this young
woman was covered with a black velvet mask; but notwithstanding this
precaution, which was in fact taken rather against others than against
him, he at once recognized his usual guide, the light and intelligent
Mme. Bonacieux.

On the evening before, they had scarcely seen each other for a moment at
the apartment of the Swiss guard, Germain, whither d’Artagnan had sent
for her. The haste which the young woman was in to convey to the queen
the excellent news of the happy return of her messenger prevented the
two lovers from exchanging more than a few words. D’Artagnan therefore
followed Mme. Bonacieux moved by a double sentiment--love and curiosity.
All the way, and in proportion as the corridors became more deserted,
d’Artagnan wished to stop the young woman, seize her and gaze upon her,
were it only for a minute; but quick as a bird she glided between his
hands, and when he wished to speak to her, her finger placed upon her
mouth, with a little imperative gesture full of grace, reminded him that
he was under the command of a power which he must blindly obey, and
which forbade him even to make the slightest complaint. At length, after
winding about for a minute or two, Mme. Bonacieux opened the door of a
closet, which was entirely dark, and led d’Artagnan into it. There she
made a fresh sign of silence, and opened a second door concealed by
tapestry. The opening of this door disclosed a brilliant light, and she
disappeared.

D’Artagnan remained for a moment motionless, asking himself where he
could be; but soon a ray of light which penetrated through the chamber,
together with the warm and perfumed air which reached him from the same
aperture, the conversation of two of three ladies in language at once
respectful and refined, and the word “Majesty” several times repeated,
indicated clearly that he was in a closet attached to the queen’s
apartment. The young man waited in comparative darkness and listened.

The queen appeared cheerful and happy, which seemed to astonish the
persons who surrounded her and who were accustomed to see her almost
always sad and full of care. The queen attributed this joyous feeling to
the beauty of the fete, to the pleasure she had experienced in the
ballet; and as it is not permissible to contradict a queen, whether she
smile or weep, everybody expatiated on the gallantry of the aldermen of
the city of Paris.

Although d’Artagnan did not at all know the queen, he soon distinguished
her voice from the others, at first by a slightly foreign accent, and
next by that tone of domination naturally impressed upon all royal
words. He heard her approach and withdraw from the partially open door;
and twice or three times he even saw the shadow of a person intercept
the light.

At length a hand and an arm, surpassingly beautiful in their form and
whiteness, glided through the tapestry. D’Artagnan at once comprehended
that this was his recompense. He cast himself on his knees, seized the
hand, and touched it respectfully with his lips. Then the hand was
withdrawn, leaving in his an object which he perceived to be a ring. The
door immediately closed, and d’Artagnan found himself again in complete
obscurity.

D’Artagnan placed the ring on his finger, and again waited; it was
evident that all was not yet over. After the reward of his devotion,
that of his love was to come. Besides, although the ballet was danced,
the evening had scarcely begun. Supper was to be served at three, and
the clock of St. Jean had struck three quarters past two.

The sound of voices diminished by degrees in the adjoining chamber. The
company was then heard departing; then the door of the closet in which
d’Artagnan was, was opened, and Mme. Bonacieux entered.

“You at last?” cried d’Artagnan.

“Silence!” said the young woman, placing her hand upon his lips;
“silence, and go the same way you came!”

“But where and when shall I see you again?” cried d’Artagnan.

“A note which you will find at home will tell you. Begone, begone!”

At these words she opened the door of the corridor, and pushed
d’Artagnan out of the room. D’Artagnan obeyed like a child, without the
least resistance or objection, which proved that he was really in love.




23 THE RENDEZVOUS


D’Artagnan ran home immediately, and although it was three o’clock in
the morning and he had some of the worst quarters of Paris to traverse,
he met with no misadventure. Everyone knows that drunkards and lovers
have a protecting deity.

He found the door of his passage open, sprang up the stairs and knocked
softly in a manner agreed upon between him and his lackey. Planchet*,
whom he had sent home two hours before from the Hotel de Ville, telling
him to sit up for him, opened the door for him.

    _*The reader may ask, “How came Planchet here?” when he was left
            “stiff as a rush” in London. In the intervening time
            Buckingham perhaps sent him to Paris, as he did the
            horses._

“Has anyone brought a letter for me?” asked d’Artagnan, eagerly.

“No one has BROUGHT a letter, monsieur,” replied Planchet; “but one has
come of itself.”

“What do you mean, blockhead?”

“I mean to say that when I came in, although I had the key of your
apartment in my pocket, and that key had never quit me, I found a letter
on the green table cover in your bedroom.”

“And where is that letter?”

“I left it where I found it, monsieur. It is not natural for letters to
enter people’s houses in this manner. If the window had been open or
even ajar, I should think nothing of it; but, no--all was hermetically
sealed. Beware, monsieur; there is certainly some magic underneath.”

Meanwhile, the young man had darted in to his chamber, and opened the
letter. It was from Mme. Bonacieux, and was expressed in these terms:

“There are many thanks to be offered to you, and to be transmitted to
you. Be this evening about ten o’clock at St. Cloud, in front of the
pavilion which stands at the corner of the house of M. d’Estrees.--C.B.”

While reading this letter, d’Artagnan felt his heart dilated and
compressed by that delicious spasm which tortures and caresses the
hearts of lovers.

It was the first billet he had received; it was the first rendezvous
that had been granted him. His heart, swelled by the intoxication of
joy, felt ready to dissolve away at the very gate of that terrestrial
paradise called Love!

“Well, monsieur,” said Planchet, who had observed his master grow red
and pale successively, “did I not guess truly? Is it not some bad
affair?”

“You are mistaken, Planchet,” replied d’Artagnan; “and as a proof, there
is a crown to drink my health.”

“I am much obliged to Monsieur for the crown he had given me, and I
promise him to follow his instructions exactly; but it is not the less
true that letters which come in this way into shut-up houses--”

“Fall from heaven, my friend, fall from heaven.”

“Then Monsieur is satisfied?” asked Planchet.

“My dear Planchet, I am the happiest of men!”

“And I may profit by Monsieur’s happiness, and go to bed?”

“Yes, go.”

“May the blessings of heaven fall upon Monsieur! But it is not the less
true that that letter--”

And Planchet retired, shaking his head with an air of doubt, which the
liberality of d’Artagnan had not entirely effaced.

Left alone, d’Artagnan read and reread his billet. Then he kissed and
rekissed twenty times the lines traced by the hand of his beautiful
mistress. At length he went to bed, fell asleep, and had golden dreams.

At seven o’clock in the morning he arose and called Planchet, who at the
second summons opened the door, his countenance not yet quite freed from
the anxiety of the preceding night.

“Planchet,” said d’Artagnan, “I am going out for all day, perhaps. You
are, therefore, your own master till seven o’clock in the evening; but
at seven o’clock you must hold yourself in readiness with two horses.”

“There!” said Planchet. “We are going again, it appears, to have our
hides pierced in all sorts of ways.”

“You will take your musketoon and your pistols.”

“There, now! Didn’t I say so?” cried Planchet. “I was sure of it--the
cursed letter!”

“Don’t be afraid, you idiot; there is nothing in hand but a party of
pleasure.”

“Ah, like the charming journey the other day, when it rained bullets and
produced a crop of steel traps!”

“Well, if you are really afraid, Monsieur Planchet,” resumed d’Artagnan,
“I will go without you. I prefer traveling alone to having a companion
who entertains the least fear.”

“Monsieur does me wrong,” said Planchet; “I thought he had seen me at
work.”

“Yes, but I thought perhaps you had worn out all your courage the first
time.”

“Monsieur shall see that upon occasion I have some left; only I beg
Monsieur not to be too prodigal of it if he wishes it to last long.”

“Do you believe you have still a certain amount of it to expend this
evening?”

“I hope so, monsieur.”

“Well, then, I count on you.”

“At the appointed hour I shall be ready; only I believed that Monsieur
had but one horse in the Guard stables.”

“Perhaps there is but one at this moment; but by this evening there will
be four.”

“It appears that our journey was a remounting journey, then?”

“Exactly so,” said d’Artagnan; and nodding to Planchet, he went out.

M Bonacieux was at his door. D’Artagnan’s intention was to go out
without speaking to the worthy mercer; but the latter made so polite and
friendly a salutation that his tenant felt obliged, not only to stop,
but to enter into conversation with him.

Besides, how is it possible to avoid a little condescension toward a
husband whose pretty wife has appointed a meeting with you that same
evening at St. Cloud, opposite D’Estrees’s pavilion? D’Artagnan
approached him with the most amiable air he could assume.

The conversation naturally fell upon the incarceration of the poor man.
M. Bonacieux, who was ignorant that d’Artagnan had overheard his
conversation with the stranger of Meung, related to his young tenant the
persecutions of that monster, M. de Laffemas, whom he never ceased to
designate, during his account, by the title of the “cardinal’s
executioner,” and expatiated at great length upon the Bastille, the
bolts, the wickets, the dungeons, the gratings, the instruments of
torture.

D’Artagnan listened to him with exemplary complaisance, and when he had
finished said, “And Madame Bonacieux, do you know who carried her
off?--For I do not forget that I owe to that unpleasant circumstance the
good fortune of having made your acquaintance.”

“Ah!” said Bonacieux, “they took good care not to tell me that; and my
wife, on her part, has sworn to me by all that’s sacred that she does
not know. But you,” continued M. Bonacieux, in a tine of perfect good
fellowship, “what has become of you all these days? I have not seen you
nor your friends, and I don’t think you could gather all that dust that
I saw Planchet brush off your boots yesterday from the pavement of
Paris.”

“You are right, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, my friends and I have been
on a little journey.”

“Far from here?”

“Oh, Lord, no! About forty leagues only. We went to take Monsieur Athos
to the waters of Forges, where my friends still remain.”

“And you have returned, have you not?” replied M. Bonacieux, giving to
his countenance a most sly air. “A handsome young fellow like you does
not obtain long leaves of absence from his mistress; and we were
impatiently waited for at Paris, were we not?”

“My faith!” said the young man, laughing, “I confess it, and so much
more the readily, my dear Bonacieux, as I see there is no concealing
anything from you. Yes, I was expected, and very impatiently, I
acknowledge.”

A slight shade passed over the brow of Bonacieux, but so slight that
d’Artagnan did not perceive it.

“And we are going to be recompensed for our diligence?” continued the
mercer, with a trifling alteration in his voice--so trifling, indeed,
that d’Artagnan did not perceive it any more than he had the momentary
shade which, an instant before, had darkened the countenance of the
worthy man.

“Ah, may you be a true prophet!” said d’Artagnan, laughing.

“No; what I say,” replied Bonacieux, “is only that I may know whether I
am delaying you.”

“Why that question, my dear host?” asked d’Artagnan. “Do you intend to
sit up for me?”

“No; but since my arrest and the robbery that was committed in my house,
I am alarmed every time I hear a door open, particularly in the night.
What the deuce can you expect? I am no swordsman.”

“Well, don’t be alarmed if I return at one, two or three o’clock in the
morning; indeed, do not be alarmed if I do not come at all.”

This time Bonacieux became so pale that d’Artagnan could not help
perceiving it, and asked him what was the matter.

“Nothing,” replied Bonacieux, “nothing. Since my misfortunes I have been
subject to faintnesses, which seize me all at once, and I have just felt
a cold shiver. Pay no attention to it; you have nothing to occupy
yourself with but being happy.”

“Then I have full occupation, for I am so.”

“Not yet; wait a little! This evening, you said.”

“Well, this evening will come, thank God! And perhaps you look for it
with as much impatience as I do; perhaps this evening Madame Bonacieux
will visit the conjugal domicile.”

“Madame Bonacieux is not at liberty this evening,” replied the husband,
seriously; “she is detained at the Louvre this evening by her duties.”

“So much the worse for you, my dear host, so much the worse! When I am
happy, I wish all the world to be so; but it appears that is not
possible.”

The young man departed, laughing at the joke, which he thought he alone
could comprehend.

“Amuse yourself well!” replied Bonacieux, in a sepulchral tone.

But d’Artagnan was too far off to hear him; and if he had heard him in
the disposition of mind he then enjoyed, he certainly would not have
remarked it.

He took his way toward the hotel of M. de Treville; his visit of the day
before, it is to be remembered, had been very short and very little
explicative.

He found Treville in a joyful mood. He had thought the king and queen
charming at the ball. It is true the cardinal had been particularly
ill-tempered. He had retired at one o’clock under the pretense of being
indisposed. As to their Majesties, they did not return to the Louvre
till six o’clock in the morning.

“Now,” said Treville, lowering his voice, and looking into every corner
of the apartment to see if they were alone, “now let us talk about
yourself, my young friend; for it is evident that your happy return has
something to do with the joy of the king, the triumph of the queen, and
the humiliation of his Eminence. You must look out for yourself.”

“What have I to fear,” replied d’Artagnan, “as long as I shall have the
luck to enjoy the favor of their Majesties?”

“Everything, believe me. The cardinal is not the man to forget a
mystification until he has settled account with the mystifier; and the
mystifier appears to me to have the air of being a certain young Gascon
of my acquaintance.”

“Do you believe that the cardinal is as well posted as yourself, and
knows that I have been to London?”

“The devil! You have been to London! Was it from London you brought that
beautiful diamond that glitters on your finger? Beware, my dear
d’Artagnan! A present from an enemy is not a good thing. Are there not
some Latin verses upon that subject? Stop!”

“Yes, doubtless,” replied d’Artagnan, who had never been able to cram
the first rudiments of that language into his head, and who had by his
ignorance driven his master to despair, “yes, doubtless there is one.”

“There certainly is one,” said M. de Treville, who had a tincture of
literature, “and Monsieur de Benserade was quoting it to me the other
day. Stop a minute--ah, this is it: ‘Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes,’
which means, ‘Beware of the enemy who makes you presents.”

“This diamond does not come from an enemy, monsieur,” replied
d’Artagnan, “it comes from the queen.”

“From the queen! Oh, oh!” said M. de Treville. “Why, it is indeed a true
royal jewel, which is worth a thousand pistoles if it is worth a denier.
By whom did the queen send you this jewel?”

“She gave it to me herself.”

“Where?”

“In the room adjoining the chamber in which she changed her toilet.”

“How?”

“Giving me her hand to kiss.”

“You have kissed the queen’s hand?” said M. de Treville, looking
earnestly at d’Artagnan.

“Her Majesty did me the honor to grant me that favor.”

“And that in the presence of witnesses! Imprudent, thrice imprudent!”

“No, monsieur, be satisfied; nobody saw her,” replied d’Artagnan, and he
related to M. de Treville how the affair came to pass.

“Oh, the women, the women!” cried the old soldier. “I know them by their
romantic imagination. Everything that savors of mystery charms them. So
you have seen the arm, that was all. You would meet the queen, and she
would not know who you are?”

“No; but thanks to this diamond,” replied the young man.

“Listen,” said M. de Treville; “shall I give you counsel, good counsel,
the counsel of a friend?”

“You will do me honor, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan.

“Well, then, off to the nearest goldsmith’s, and sell that diamond for
the highest price you can get from him. However much of a Jew he may be,
he will give you at least eight hundred pistoles. Pistoles have no name,
young man, and that ring has a terrible one, which may betray him who
wears it.”

“Sell this ring, a ring which comes from my sovereign? Never!” said
d’Artagnan.

“Then, at least turn the gem inside, you silly fellow; for everybody
must be aware that a cadet from Gascony does not find such stones in his
mother’s jewel case.”

“You think, then, I have something to dread?” asked d’Artagnan.

“I mean to say, young man, that he who sleeps over a mine the match of
which is already lighted, may consider himself in safety in comparison
with you.”

“The devil!” said d’Artagnan, whom the positive tone of M. de Treville
began to disquiet, “the devil! What must I do?”

“Above all things be always on your guard. The cardinal has a tenacious
memory and a long arm; you may depend upon it, he will repay you by some
ill turn.”

“But of what sort?”

“Eh! How can I tell? Has he not all the tricks of a demon at his
command? The least that can be expected is that you will be arrested.”

“What! Will they dare to arrest a man in his Majesty’s service?”

“PARDIEU! They did not scruple much in the case of Athos. At all events,
young man, rely upon one who has been thirty years at court. Do not lull
yourself in security, or you will be lost; but, on the contrary--and it
is I who say it--see enemies in all directions. If anyone seeks a
quarrel with you, shun it, were it with a child of ten years old. If you
are attacked by day or by night, fight, but retreat, without shame; if
you cross a bridge, feel every plank of it with your foot, lest one
should give way beneath you; if you pass before a house which is being
built, look up, for fear a stone should fall upon your head; if you stay
out late, be always followed by your lackey, and let your lackey be
armed--if, by the by, you can be sure of your lackey. Mistrust
everybody, your friend, your brother, your mistress--your mistress above
all.”

D’Artagnan blushed.

“My mistress above all,” repeated he, mechanically; “and why her rather
than another?”

“Because a mistress is one of the cardinal’s favorite means; he has not
one that is more expeditious. A woman will sell you for ten pistoles,
witness Delilah. You are acquainted with the Scriptures?”

D’Artagnan thought of the appointment Mme. Bonacieux had made with him
for that very evening; but we are bound to say, to the credit of our
hero, that the bad opinion entertained by M. de Treville of women in
general, did not inspire him with the least suspicion of his pretty
hostess.

“But, A PROPOS,” resumed M. de Treville, “what has become of your three
companions?”

“I was about to ask you if you had heard any news of them?”

“None, monsieur.”

“Well, I left them on my road--Porthos at Chantilly, with a duel on his
hands; Aramis at Crevecoeur, with a ball in his shoulder; and Athos at
Amiens, detained by an accusation of coining.”

“See there, now!” said M. de Treville; “and how the devil did you
escape?”

“By a miracle, monsieur, I must acknowledge, with a sword thrust in my
breast, and by nailing the Comte de Wardes on the byroad to Calais, like
a butterfly on a tapestry.”

“There again! De Wardes, one of the cardinal’s men, a cousin of
Rochefort! Stop, my friend, I have an idea.”

“Speak, monsieur.”

“In your place, I would do one thing.”

“What?”

“While his Eminence was seeking for me in Paris, I would take, without
sound of drum or trumpet, the road to Picardy, and would go and make
some inquiries concerning my three companions. What the devil! They
merit richly that piece of attention on your part.”

“The advice is good, monsieur, and tomorrow I will set out.”

“Tomorrow! Any why not this evening?”

“This evening, monsieur, I am detained in Paris by indispensable
business.”

“Ah, young man, young man, some flirtation or other. Take care, I repeat
to you, take care. It is woman who has ruined us, still ruins us, and
will ruin us, as long as the world stands. Take my advice and set out
this evening.”

“Impossible, monsieur.”

“You have given your word, then?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Ah, that’s quite another thing; but promise me, if you should not be
killed tonight, that you will go tomorrow.”

“I promise it.”

“Do you need money?”

“I have still fifty pistoles. That, I think, is as much as I shall
want.”

“But your companions?”

“I don’t think they can be in need of any. We left Paris, each with
seventy-five pistoles in his pocket.”

“Shall I see you again before your departure?”

“I think not, monsieur, unless something new should happen.”

“Well, a pleasant journey.”

“Thanks, monsieur.”

D’Artagnan left M. de Treville, touched more than ever by his paternal
solicitude for his Musketeers.

He called successively at the abodes of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.
Neither of them had returned. Their lackeys likewise were absent, and
nothing had been heard of either the one or the other. He would have
inquired after them of their mistresses, but he was neither acquainted
with Porthos’s nor Aramis’s, and as to Athos, he had none.

As he passed the Hotel des Gardes, he took a glance in to the stables.
Three of the four horses had already arrived. Planchet, all
astonishment, was busy grooming them, and had already finished two.

“Ah, monsieur,” said Planchet, on perceiving d’Artagnan, “how glad I am
to see you.”

“Why so, Planchet?” asked the young man.

“Do you place confidence in our landlord--Monsieur Bonacieux?”

“I? Not the least in the world.”

“Oh, you do quite right, monsieur.”

“But why this question?”

“Because, while you were talking with him, I watched you without
listening to you; and, monsieur, his countenance changed color two or
three times!”

“Bah!”

“Preoccupied as Monsieur was with the letter he had received, he did not
observe that; but I, whom the strange fashion in which that letter came
into the house had placed on my guard--I did not lose a movement of his
features.”

“And you found it?”

“Traitorous, monsieur.”

“Indeed!”

“Still more; as soon as Monsieur had left and disappeared round the
corner of the street, Monsieur Bonacieux took his hat, shut his door,
and set off at a quick pace in an opposite direction.”

“It seems you are right, Planchet; all this appears to be a little
mysterious; and be assured that we will not pay him our rent until the
matter shall be categorically explained to us.”

“Monsieur jests, but Monsieur will see.”

“What would you have, Planchet? What must come is written.”

“Monsieur does not then renounce his excursion for this evening?”

“Quite the contrary, Planchet; the more ill will I have toward Monsieur
Bonacieux, the more punctual I shall be in keeping the appointment made
by that letter which makes you so uneasy.”

“Then that is Monsieur’s determination?”

“Undeniably, my friend. At nine o’clock, then, be ready here at the
hotel, I will come and take you.”

Planchet seeing there was no longer any hope of making his master
renounce his project, heaved a profound sigh and set to work to groom
the third horse.

As to d’Artagnan, being at bottom a prudent youth, instead of returning
home, went and dined with the Gascon priest, who, at the time of the
distress of the four friends, had given them a breakfast of chocolate.




24 THE PAVILION


At nine o’clock d’Artagnan was at the Hotel des Gardes; he found
Planchet all ready. The fourth horse had arrived.

Planchet was armed with his musketoon and a pistol. D’Artagnan had his
sword and placed two pistols in his belt; then both mounted and departed
quietly. It was quite dark, and no one saw them go out. Planchet took
place behind his master, and kept at a distance of ten paces from him.

D’Artagnan crossed the quays, went out by the gate of La Conference and
followed the road, much more beautiful then than it is now, which leads
to St. Cloud.

As long as he was in the city, Planchet kept at the respectful distance
he had imposed upon himself; but as soon as the road began to be more
lonely and dark, he drew softly nearer, so that when they entered the
Bois de Boulogne he found himself riding quite naturally side by side
with his master. In fact, we must not dissemble that the oscillation of
the tall trees and the reflection of the moon in the dark underwood gave
him serious uneasiness. D’Artagnan could not help perceiving that
something more than usual was passing in the mind of his lackey and
said, “Well, Monsieur Planchet, what is the matter with us now?”

“Don’t you think, monsieur, that woods are like churches?”

“How so, Planchet?”

“Because we dare not speak aloud in one or the other.”

“But why did you not dare to speak aloud, Planchet--because you are
afraid?”

“Afraid of being heard? Yes, monsieur.”

“Afraid of being heard! Why, there is nothing improper in our
conversation, my dear Planchet, and no one could find fault with it.”

“Ah, monsieur!” replied Planchet, recurring to his besetting idea, “that
Monsieur Bonacieux has something vicious in his eyebrows, and something
very unpleasant in the play of his lips.”

“What the devil makes you think of Bonacieux?”

“Monsieur, we think of what we can, and not of what we will.”

“Because you are a coward, Planchet.”

“Monsieur, we must not confound prudence with cowardice; prudence is a
virtue.”

“And you are very virtuous, are you not, Planchet?”

“Monsieur, is not that the barrel of a musket which glitters yonder? Had
we not better lower our heads?”

“In truth,” murmured d’Artagnan, to whom M. de Treville’s recommendation
recurred, “this animal will end by making me afraid.” And he put his
horse into a trot.

Planchet followed the movements of his master as if he had been his
shadow, and was soon trotting by his side.

“Are we going to continue this pace all night?” asked Planchet.

“No; you are at your journey’s end.”

“How, monsieur! And you?”

“I am going a few steps farther.”

“And Monsieur leaves me here alone?”

“You are afraid, Planchet?”

“No; I only beg leave to observe to Monsieur that the night will be very
cold, that chills bring on rheumatism, and that a lackey who has the
rheumatism makes but a poor servant, particularly to a master as active
as Monsieur.”

“Well, if you are cold, Planchet, you can go into one of those cabarets
that you see yonder, and be in waiting for me at the door by six o’clock
in the morning.”

“Monsieur, I have eaten and drunk respectfully the crown you gave me
this morning, so that I have not a sou left in case I should be cold.”

“Here’s half a pistole. Tomorrow morning.”

D’Artagnan sprang from his horse, threw the bridle to Planchet, and
departed at a quick pace, folding his cloak around him.

“Good Lord, how cold I am!” cried Planchet, as soon as he had lost sight
of his master; and in such haste was he to warm himself that he went
straight to a house set out with all the attributes of a suburban
tavern, and knocked at the door.

In the meantime d’Artagnan, who had plunged into a bypath, continued his
route and reached St. Cloud; but instead of following the main street he
turned behind the chateau, reached a sort of retired lane, and found
himself soon in front of the pavilion named. It was situated in a very
private spot. A high wall, at the angle of which was the pavilion, ran
along one side of this lane, and on the other was a little garden
connected with a poor cottage which was protected by a hedge from
passers-by.

He gained the place appointed, and as no signal had been given him by
which to announce his presence, he waited.

Not the least noise was to be heard; it might be imagined that he was a
hundred miles from the capital. D’Artagnan leaned against the hedge,
after having cast a glance behind it. Beyond that hedge, that garden,
and that cottage, a dark mist enveloped with its folds that immensity
where Paris slept--a vast void from which glittered a few luminous
points, the funeral stars of that hell!

But for d’Artagnan all aspects were clothed happily, all ideas wore a
smile, all shades were diaphanous. The appointed hour was about to
strike. In fact, at the end of a few minutes the belfry of St. Cloud let
fall slowly ten strokes from its sonorous jaws. There was something
melancholy in this brazen voice pouring out its lamentations in the
middle of the night; but each of those strokes, which made up the
expected hour, vibrated harmoniously to the heart of the young man.

His eyes were fixed upon the little pavilion situated at the angle of
the wall, of which all the windows were closed with shutters, except one
on the first story. Through this window shone a mild light which
silvered the foliage of two or three linden trees which formed a group
outside the park. There could be no doubt that behind this little
window, which threw forth such friendly beams, the pretty Mme. Bonacieux
expected him.

Wrapped in this sweet idea, d’Artagnan waited half an hour without the
least impatience, his eyes fixed upon that charming little abode of
which he could perceive a part of the ceiling with its gilded moldings,
attesting the elegance of the rest of the apartment.

The belfry of St. Cloud sounded half past ten.

This time, without knowing why, d’Artagnan felt a cold shiver run
through his veins. Perhaps the cold began to affect him, and he took a
perfectly physical sensation for a moral impression.

Then the idea seized him that he had read incorrectly, and that the
appointment was for eleven o’clock. He drew near to the window, and
placing himself so that a ray of light should fall upon the letter as he
held it, he drew it from his pocket and read it again; but he had not
been mistaken, the appointment was for ten o’clock. He went and resumed
his post, beginning to be rather uneasy at this silence and this
solitude.

Eleven o’clock sounded.

D’Artagnan began now really to fear that something had happened to Mme.
Bonacieux. He clapped his hands three times--the ordinary signal of
lovers; but nobody replied to him, not even an echo.

He then thought, with a touch of vexation, that perhaps the young woman
had fallen asleep while waiting for him. He approached the wall, and
tried to climb it; but the wall had been recently pointed, and
d’Artagnan could get no hold.

At that moment he thought of the trees, upon whose leaves the light
still shone; and as one of them drooped over the road, he thought that
from its branches he might get a glimpse of the interior of the
pavilion.

The tree was easy to climb. Besides, d’Artagnan was but twenty years
old, and consequently had not yet forgotten his schoolboy habits. In an
instant he was among the branches, and his keen eyes plunged through the
transparent panes into the interior of the pavilion.

It was a strange thing, and one which made d’Artagnan tremble from the
sole of his foot to the roots of his hair, to find that this soft light,
this calm lamp, enlightened a scene of fearful disorder. One of the
windows was broken, the door of the chamber had been beaten in and hung,
split in two, on its hinges. A table, which had been covered with an
elegant supper, was overturned. The decanters broken in pieces, and the
fruits crushed, strewed the floor. Everything in the apartment gave
evidence of a violent and desperate struggle. D’Artagnan even fancied he
could recognize amid this strange disorder, fragments of garments, and
some bloody spots staining the cloth and the curtains. He hastened to
descend into the street, with a frightful beating at his heart; he
wished to see if he could find other traces of violence.

The little soft light shone on in the calmness of the night. D’Artagnan
then perceived a thing that he had not before remarked--for nothing had
led him to the examination--that the ground, trampled here and
hoofmarked there, presented confused traces of men and horses. Besides,
the wheels of a carriage, which appeared to have come from Paris, had
made a deep impression in the soft earth, which did not extend beyond
the pavilion, but turned again toward Paris.

At length d’Artagnan, in pursuing his researches, found near the wall a
woman’s torn glove. This glove, wherever it had not touched the muddy
ground, was of irreproachable odor. It was one of those perfumed gloves
that lovers like to snatch from a pretty hand.

As d’Artagnan pursued his investigations, a more abundant and more icy
sweat rolled in large drops from his forehead; his heart was oppressed
by a horrible anguish; his respiration was broken and short. And yet he
said, to reassure himself, that this pavilion perhaps had nothing in
common with Mme. Bonacieux; that the young woman had made an appointment
with him before the pavilion, and not in the pavilion; that she might
have been detained in Paris by her duties, or perhaps by the jealousy of
her husband.

But all these reasons were combated, destroyed, overthrown, by that
feeling of intimate pain which, on certain occasions, takes possession
of our being, and cries to us so as to be understood unmistakably that
some great misfortune is hanging over us.

Then d’Artagnan became almost wild. He ran along the high road, took the
path he had before taken, and reaching the ferry, interrogated the
boatman.

About seven o’clock in the evening, the boatman had taken over a young
woman, wrapped in a black mantle, who appeared to be very anxious not to
be recognized; but entirely on account of her precautions, the boatman
had paid more attention to her and discovered that she was young and
pretty.

There were then, as now, a crowd of young and pretty women who came to
St. Cloud, and who had reasons for not being seen, and yet d’Artagnan
did not for an instant doubt that it was Mme. Bonacieux whom the boatman
had noticed.

D’Artagnan took advantage of the lamp which burned in the cabin of the
ferryman to read the billet of Mme. Bonacieux once again, and satisfy
himself that he had not been mistaken, that the appointment was at St.
Cloud and not elsewhere, before the D’Estrees’s pavilion and not in
another street. Everything conspired to prove to d’Artagnan that his
presentiments had not deceived him, and that a great misfortune had
happened.

He again ran back to the chateau. It appeared to him that something
might have happened at the pavilion in his absence, and that fresh
information awaited him. The lane was still deserted, and the same calm
soft light shone through the window.

D’Artagnan then thought of that cottage, silent and obscure, which had
no doubt seen all, and could tell its tale. The gate of the enclosure
was shut; but he leaped over the hedge, and in spite of the barking of a
chained-up dog, went up to the cabin.

No one answered to his first knocking. A silence of death reigned in the
cabin as in the pavilion; but as the cabin was his last resource, he
knocked again.

It soon appeared to him that he heard a slight noise within--a timid
noise which seemed to tremble lest it should be heard.

Then d’Artagnan ceased knocking, and prayed with an accent so full of
anxiety and promises, terror and cajolery, that his voice was of a
nature to reassure the most fearful. At length an old, worm-eaten
shutter was opened, or rather pushed ajar, but closed again as soon as
the light from a miserable lamp which burned in the corner had shone
upon the baldric, sword belt, and pistol pommels of d’Artagnan.
Nevertheless, rapid as the movement had been, d’Artagnan had had time to
get a glimpse of the head of an old man.

“In the name of heaven!” cried he, “listen to me; I have been waiting
for someone who has not come. I am dying with anxiety. Has anything
particular happened in the neighborhood? Speak!”

The window was again opened slowly, and the same face appeared, only it
was now still more pale than before.

D’Artagnan related his story simply, with the omission of names. He told
how he had a rendezvous with a young woman before that pavilion, and
how, not seeing her come, he had climbed the linden tree, and by the
light of the lamp had seen the disorder of the chamber.

The old man listened attentively, making a sign only that it was all so;
and then, when d’Artagnan had ended, he shook his head with an air that
announced nothing good.

“What do you mean?” cried d’Artagnan. “In the name of heaven, explain
yourself!”

“Oh! Monsieur,” said the old man, “ask me nothing; for if I dared tell
you what I have seen, certainly no good would befall me.”

“You have, then, seen something?” replied d’Artagnan. “In that case, in
the name of heaven,” continued he, throwing him a pistole, “tell me what
you have seen, and I will pledge you the word of a gentleman that not
one of your words shall escape from my heart.”

The old man read so much truth and so much grief in the face of the
young man that he made him a sign to listen, and repeated in a low
voice: “It was scarcely nine o’clock when I heard a noise in the street,
and was wondering what it could be, when on coming to my door, I found
that somebody was endeavoring to open it. As I am very poor and am not
afraid of being robbed, I went and opened the gate and saw three men at
a few paces from it. In the shadow was a carriage with two horses, and
some saddlehorses. These horses evidently belonged to the three men, who
were dressed as cavaliers. ‘Ah, my worthy gentlemen,’ cried I, ‘what do
you want?’ ‘You must have a ladder?’ said he who appeared to be the
leader of the party. ‘Yes, monsieur, the one with which I gather my
fruit.’ ‘Lend it to us, and go into your house again; there is a crown
for the annoyance we have caused you. Only remember this--if you speak a
word of what you may see or what you may hear (for you will look and you
will listen, I am quite sure, however we may threaten you), you are
lost.’ At these words he threw me a crown, which I picked up, and he
took the ladder. After shutting the gate behind them, I pretended to
return to the house, but I immediately went out a back door, and
stealing along in the shade of the hedge, I gained yonder clump of
elder, from which I could hear and see everything. The three men brought
the carriage up quietly, and took out of it a little man, stout, short,
elderly, and commonly dressed in clothes of a dark color, who ascended
the ladder very carefully, looked suspiciously in at the window of the
pavilion, came down as quietly as he had gone up, and whispered, ‘It is
she!’ Immediately, he who had spoken to me approached the door of the
pavilion, opened it with a key he had in his hand, closed the door and
disappeared, while at the same time the other two men ascended the
ladder. The little old man remained at the coach door; the coachman took
care of his horses, the lackey held the saddlehorses. All at once great
cries resounded in the pavilion, and a woman came to the window, and
opened it, as if to throw herself out of it; but as soon as she
perceived the other two men, she fell back and they went into the
chamber. Then I saw no more; but I heard the noise of breaking
furniture. The woman screamed, and cried for help; but her cries were
soon stifled. Two of the men appeared, bearing the woman in their arms,
and carried her to the carriage, into which the little old man got after
her. The leader closed the window, came out an instant after by the
door, and satisfied himself that the woman was in the carriage. His two
companions were already on horseback. He sprang into his saddle; the
lackey took his place by the coachman; the carriage went off at a quick
pace, escorted by the three horsemen, and all was over. From that moment
I have neither seen nor heard anything.”

D’Artagnan, entirely overcome by this terrible story, remained
motionless and mute, while all the demons of anger and jealousy were
howling in his heart.

“But, my good gentleman,” resumed the old man, upon whom this mute
despair certainly produced a greater effect than cries and tears would
have done, “do not take on so; they did not kill her, and that’s a
comfort.”

“Can you guess,” said d’Artagnan, “who was the man who headed this
infernal expedition?”

“I don’t know him.”

“But as you spoke to him you must have seen him.”

“Oh, it’s a description you want?”

“Exactly so.”

“A tall, dark man, with black mustaches, dark eyes, and the air of a
gentleman.”

“That’s the man!” cried d’Artagnan, “again he, forever he! He is my
demon, apparently. And the other?”

“Which?”

“The short one.”

“Oh, he was not a gentleman, I’ll answer for it; besides, he did not
wear a sword, and the others treated him with small consideration.”

“Some lackey,” murmured d’Artagnan. “Poor woman, poor woman, what have
they done with you?”

“You have promised to be secret, my good monsieur?” said the old man.

“And I renew my promise. Be easy, I am a gentleman. A gentleman has but
his word, and I have given you mine.”

With a heavy heart, d’Artagnan again bent his way toward the ferry.
Sometimes he hoped it could not be Mme. Bonacieux, and that he should
find her next day at the Louvre; sometimes he feared she had had an
intrigue with another, who, in a jealous fit, had surprised her and
carried her off. His mind was torn by doubt, grief, and despair.

“Oh, if I had my three friends here,” cried he, “I should have, at
least, some hopes of finding her; but who knows what has become of
them?”

It was past midnight; the next thing was to find Planchet. D’Artagnan
went successively into all the cabarets in which there was a light, but
could not find Planchet in any of them.

At the sixth he began to reflect that the search was rather dubious.
D’Artagnan had appointed six o’clock in the morning for his lackey, and
wherever he might be, he was right.

Besides, it came into the young man’s mind that by remaining in the
environs of the spot on which this sad event had passed, he would,
perhaps, have some light thrown upon the mysterious affair. At the sixth
cabaret, then, as we said, d’Artagnan stopped, asked for a bottle of
wine of the best quality, and placing himself in the darkest corner of
the room, determined thus to wait till daylight; but this time again his
hopes were disappointed, and although he listened with all his ears, he
heard nothing, amid the oaths, coarse jokes, and abuse which passed
between the laborers, servants, and carters who comprised the honorable
society of which he formed a part, which could put him upon the least
track of her who had been stolen from him. He was compelled, then, after
having swallowed the contents of his bottle, to pass the time as well as
to evade suspicion, to fall into the easiest position in his corner and
to sleep, whether well or ill. D’Artagnan, be it remembered, was only
twenty years old, and at that age sleep has its imprescriptible rights
which it imperiously insists upon, even with the saddest hearts.

Toward six o’clock d’Artagnan awoke with that uncomfortable feeling
which generally accompanies the break of day after a bad night. He was
not long in making his toilet. He examined himself to see if advantage
had been taken of his sleep, and having found his diamond ring on his
finger, his purse in his pocket, and his pistols in his belt, he rose,
paid for his bottle, and went out to try if he could have any better
luck in his search after his lackey than he had had the night before.
The first thing he perceived through the damp gray mist was honest
Planchet, who, with the two horses in hand, awaited him at the door of a
little blind cabaret, before which d’Artagnan had passed without even a
suspicion of its existence.




25 PORTHOS


Instead of returning directly home, d’Artagnan alighted at the door of
M. de Treville, and ran quickly up the stairs. This time he had decided
to relate all that had passed. M. de Treville would doubtless give him
good advice as to the whole affair. Besides, as M. de Treville saw the
queen almost daily, he might be able to draw from her Majesty some
intelligence of the poor young woman, whom they were doubtless making
pay very dearly for her devotedness to her mistress.

M de Treville listened to the young man’s account with a seriousness
which proved that he saw something else in this adventure besides a love
affair. When d’Artagnan had finished, he said, “Hum! All this savors of
his Eminence, a league off.”

“But what is to be done?” said d’Artagnan.

“Nothing, absolutely nothing, at present, but quitting Paris, as I told
you, as soon as possible. I will see the queen; I will relate to her the
details of the disappearance of this poor woman, of which she is no
doubt ignorant. These details will guide her on her part, and on your
return, I shall perhaps have some good news to tell you. Rely on me.”

D’Artagnan knew that, although a Gascon, M. de Treville was not in the
habit of making promises, and that when by chance he did promise, he
more than kept his word. He bowed to him, then, full of gratitude for
the past and for the future; and the worthy captain, who on his side
felt a lively interest in this young man, so brave and so resolute,
pressed his hand kindly, wishing him a pleasant journey.

Determined to put the advice of M. de Treville in practice instantly,
d’Artagnan directed his course toward the Rue des Fossoyeurs, in order
to superintend the packing of his valise. On approaching the house, he
perceived M. Bonacieux in morning costume, standing at his threshold.
All that the prudent Planchet had said to him the preceding evening
about the sinister character of the old man recurred to the mind of
d’Artagnan, who looked at him with more attention than he had done
before. In fact, in addition to that yellow, sickly paleness which
indicates the insinuation of the bile in the blood, and which might,
besides, be accidental, d’Artagnan remarked something perfidiously
significant in the play of the wrinkled features of his countenance. A
rogue does not laugh in the same way that an honest man does; a
hypocrite does not shed the tears of a man of good faith. All falsehood
is a mask; and however well made the mask may be, with a little
attention we may always succeed in distinguishing it from the true face.

It appeared, then, to d’Artagnan that M. Bonacieux wore a mask, and
likewise that that mask was most disagreeable to look upon. In
consequence of this feeling of repugnance, he was about to pass without
speaking to him, but, as he had done the day before, M. Bonacieux
accosted him.

“Well, young man,” said he, “we appear to pass rather gay nights! Seven
o’clock in the morning! PESTE! You seem to reverse ordinary customs, and
come home at the hour when other people are going out.”

“No one can reproach you for anything of the kind, Monsieur Bonacieux,”
said the young man; “you are a model for regular people. It is true that
when a man possesses a young and pretty wife, he has no need to seek
happiness elsewhere. Happiness comes to meet him, does it not, Monsieur
Bonacieux?”

Bonacieux became as pale as death, and grinned a ghastly smile.

“Ah, ah!” said Bonacieux, “you are a jocular companion! But where the
devil were you gladding last night, my young master? It does not appear
to be very clean in the crossroads.”

D’Artagnan glanced down at his boots, all covered with mud; but that
same glance fell upon the shoes and stockings of the mercer, and it
might have been said they had been dipped in the same mud heap. Both
were stained with splashes of mud of the same appearance.

Then a sudden idea crossed the mind of d’Artagnan. That little stout
man, short and elderly, that sort of lackey, dressed in dark clothes,
treated without ceremony by the men wearing swords who composed the
escort, was Bonacieux himself. The husband had presided at the abduction
of his wife.

A terrible inclination seized d’Artagnan to grasp the mercer by the
throat and strangle him; but, as we have said, he was a very prudent
youth, and he restrained himself. However, the revolution which appeared
upon his countenance was so visible that Bonacieux was terrified at it,
and he endeavored to draw back a step or two; but as he was standing
before the half of the door which was shut, the obstacle compelled him
to keep his place.

“Ah, but you are joking, my worthy man!” said d’Artagnan. “It appears to
me that if my boots need a sponge, your stockings and shoes stand in
equal need of a brush. May you not have been philandering a little also,
Monsieur Bonacieux? Oh, the devil! That’s unpardonable in a man of your
age, and who besides, has such a pretty wife as yours.”

“Oh, Lord! no,” said Bonacieux, “but yesterday I went to St. Mande to
make some inquiries after a servant, as I cannot possibly do without
one; and the roads were so bad that I brought back all this mud, which I
have not yet had time to remove.”

The place named by Bonacieux as that which had been the object of his
journey was a fresh proof in support of the suspicions d’Artagnan had
conceived. Bonacieux had named Mande because Mande was in an exactly
opposite direction from St. Cloud. This probability afforded him his
first consolation. If Bonacieux knew where his wife was, one might, by
extreme means, force the mercer to open his teeth and let his secret
escape. The question, then, was how to change this probability into a
certainty.

“Pardon, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, if I don’t stand upon ceremony,”
said d’Artagnan, “but nothing makes one so thirsty as want of sleep. I
am parched with thirst. Allow me to take a glass of water in your
apartment; you know that is never refused among neighbors.”

Without waiting for the permission of his host, d’Artagnan went quickly
into the house, and cast a rapid glance at the bed. It had not been
used. Bonacieux had not been abed. He had only been back an hour or two;
he had accompanied his wife to the place of her confinement, or else at
least to the first relay.

“Thanks, Monsieur Bonacieux,” said d’Artagnan, emptying his glass, “that
is all I wanted of you. I will now go up into my apartment. I will make
Planchet brush my boots; and when he has done, I will, if you like, send
him to you to brush your shoes.”

He left the mercer quite astonished at his singular farewell, and asking
himself if he had not been a little inconsiderate.

At the top of the stairs he found Planchet in a great fright.

“Ah, monsieur!” cried Planchet, as soon as he perceived his master,
“here is more trouble. I thought you would never come in.”

“What’s the matter now, Planchet?” demanded d’Artagnan.

“Oh! I give you a hundred, I give you a thousand times to guess,
monsieur, the visit I received in your absence.”

“When?”

“About half an hour ago, while you were at Monsieur de Treville’s.”

“Who has been here? Come, speak.”

“Monsieur de Cavois.”

“Monsieur de Cavois?”

“In person.”

“The captain of the cardinal’s Guards?”

“Himself.”

“Did he come to arrest me?”

“I have no doubt that he did, monsieur, for all his wheedling manner.”

“Was he so sweet, then?”

“Indeed, he was all honey, monsieur.”

“Indeed!”

“He came, he said, on the part of his Eminence, who wished you well, and
to beg you to follow him to the Palais-Royal*.”

    _*It was called the Palais-Cardinal before Richelieu gave it to
            the King._

“What did you answer him?”

“That the thing was impossible, seeing that you were not at home, as he
could see.”

“Well, what did he say then?”

“That you must not fail to call upon him in the course of the day; and
then he added in a low voice, ‘Tell your master that his Eminence is
very well disposed toward him, and that his fortune perhaps depends upon
this interview.’”

“The snare is rather MALADROIT for the cardinal,” replied the young man,
smiling.

“Oh, I saw the snare, and I answered you would be quite in despair on
your return.

“‘Where has he gone?’ asked Monsieur de Cavois.

“‘To Troyes, in Champagne,’ I answered.

“‘And when did he set out?’

“‘Yesterday evening.’”

“Planchet, my friend,” interrupted d’Artagnan, “you are really a
precious fellow.”

“You will understand, monsieur, I thought there would be still time, if
you wish, to see Monsieur de Cavois to contradict me by saying you were
not yet gone. The falsehood would then lie at my door, and as I am not a
gentleman, I may be allowed to lie.”

“Be of good heart, Planchet, you shall preserve your reputation as a
veracious man. In a quarter of an hour we set off.”

“That’s the advice I was about to give Monsieur; and where are we going,
may I ask, without being too curious?”

“PARDIEU! In the opposite direction to that which you said I was gone.
Besides, are you not as anxious to learn news of Grimaud, Mousqueton,
and Bazin as I am to know what has become of Athos, Porthos, and
Aramis?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said Planchet, “and I will go as soon as you please.
Indeed, I think provincial air will suit us much better just now than
the air of Paris. So then--”

“So then, pack up our luggage, Planchet, and let us be off. On my part,
I will go out with my hands in my pockets, that nothing may be
suspected. You may join me at the Hotel des Gardes. By the way,
Planchet, I think you are right with respect to our host, and that he is
decidedly a frightfully low wretch.”

“Ah, monsieur, you may take my word when I tell you anything. I am a
physiognomist, I assure you.”

D’Artagnan went out first, as had been agreed upon. Then, in order that
he might have nothing to reproach himself with, he directed his steps,
for the last time, toward the residences of his three friends. No news
had been received of them; only a letter, all perfumed and of an elegant
writing in small characters, had come for Aramis. D’Artagnan took charge
of it. Ten minutes afterward Planchet joined him at the stables of the
Hotel des Gardes. D’Artagnan, in order that there might be no time lost,
had saddled his horse himself.

“That’s well,” said he to Planchet, when the latter added the
portmanteau to the equipment. “Now saddle the other three horses.”

“Do you think, then, monsieur, that we shall travel faster with two
horses apiece?” said Planchet, with his shrewd air.

“No, Monsieur Jester,” replied d’Artagnan; “but with our four horses we
may bring back our three friends, if we should have the good fortune to
find them living.”

“Which is a great chance,” replied Planchet, “but we must not despair of
the mercy of God.”

“Amen!” said d’Artagnan, getting into his saddle.

As they went from the Hotel des Gardes, they separated, leaving the
street at opposite ends, one having to quit Paris by the Barriere de la
Villette and the other by the Barriere Montmartre, to meet again beyond
St. Denis--a strategic maneuver which, having been executed with equal
punctuality, was crowned with the most fortunate results. D’Artagnan and
Planchet entered Pierrefitte together.

Planchet was more courageous, it must be admitted, by day than by night.
His natural prudence, however, never forsook him for a single instant.
He had forgotten not one of the incidents of the first journey, and he
looked upon everybody he met on the road as an enemy. It followed that
his hat was forever in his hand, which procured him some severe
reprimands from d’Artagnan, who feared that his excess of politeness
would lead people to think he was the lackey of a man of no consequence.

Nevertheless, whether the passengers were really touched by the urbanity
of Planchet or whether this time nobody was posted on the young man’s
road, our two travelers arrived at Chantilly without any accident, and
alighted at the tavern of Great St. Martin, the same at which they had
stopped on their first journey.

The host, on seeing a young man followed by a lackey with two extra
horses, advanced respectfully to the door. Now, as they had already
traveled eleven leagues, d’Artagnan thought it time to stop, whether
Porthos were or were not in the inn. Perhaps it would not be prudent to
ask at once what had become of the Musketeer. The result of these
reflections was that d’Artagnan, without asking information of any kind,
alighted, commended the horses to the care of his lackey, entered a
small room destined to receive those who wished to be alone, and desired
the host to bring him a bottle of his best wine and as good a breakfast
as possible--a desire which further corroborated the high opinion the
innkeeper had formed of the traveler at first sight.

D’Artagnan was therefore served with miraculous celerity. The regiment
of the Guards was recruited among the first gentlemen of the kingdom;
and d’Artagnan, followed by a lackey, and traveling with four
magnificent horses, despite the simplicity of his uniform, could not
fail to make a sensation. The host desired himself to serve him; which
d’Artagnan perceiving, ordered two glasses to be brought, and commenced
the following conversation.

“My faith, my good host,” said d’Artagnan, filling the two glasses, “I
asked for a bottle of your best wine, and if you have deceived me, you
will be punished in what you have sinned; for seeing that I hate
drinking by myself, you shall drink with me. Take your glass, then, and
let us drink. But what shall we drink to, so as to avoid wounding any
susceptibility? Let us drink to the prosperity of your establishment.”

“Your Lordship does me much honor,” said the host, “and I thank you
sincerely for your kind wish.”

“But don’t mistake,” said d’Artagnan, “there is more selfishness in my
toast than perhaps you may think--for it is only in prosperous
establishments that one is well received. In hotels that do not
flourish, everything is in confusion, and the traveler is a victim to
the embarrassments of his host. Now, I travel a great deal, particularly
on this road, and I wish to see all innkeepers making a fortune.”

“It seems to me,” said the host, “that this is not the first time I have
had the honor of seeing Monsieur.”

“Bah, I have passed perhaps ten times through Chantilly, and out of the
ten times I have stopped three or four times at your house at least. Why
I was here only ten or twelve days ago. I was conducting some friends,
Musketeers, one of whom, by the by, had a dispute with a stranger--a man
who sought a quarrel with him, for I don’t know what.”

“Exactly so,” said the host; “I remember it perfectly. It is not
Monsieur Porthos that your Lordship means?”

“Yes, that is my companion’s name. My God, my dear host, tell me if
anything has happened to him?”

“Your Lordship must have observed that he could not continue his
journey.”

“Why, to be sure, he promised to rejoin us, and we have seen nothing of
him.”

“He has done us the honor to remain here.”

“What, he had done you the honor to remain here?”

“Yes, monsieur, in this house; and we are even a little uneasy--”

“On what account?”

“Of certain expenses he has contracted.”

“Well, but whatever expenses he may have incurred, I am sure he is in a
condition to pay them.”

“Ah, monsieur, you infuse genuine balm into my blood. We have made
considerable advances; and this very morning the surgeon declared that
if Monsieur Porthos did not pay him, he should look to me, as it was I
who had sent for him.”

“Porthos is wounded, then?”

“I cannot tell you, monsieur.”

“What! You cannot tell me? Surely you ought to be able to tell me better
than any other person.”

“Yes; but in our situation we must not say all we know--particularly as
we have been warned that our ears should answer for our tongues.”

“Well, can I see Porthos?”

“Certainly, monsieur. Take the stairs on your right; go up the first
flight and knock at Number One. Only warn him that it is you.”

“Why should I do that?”

“Because, monsieur, some mischief might happen to you.”

“Of what kind, in the name of wonder?”

“Monsieur Porthos may imagine you belong to the house, and in a fit of
passion might run his sword through you or blow out your brains.”

“What have you done to him, then?”

“We have asked him for money.”

“The devil! Ah, I can understand that. It is a demand that Porthos takes
very ill when he is not in funds; but I know he must be so at present.”

“We thought so, too, monsieur. As our house is carried on very
regularly, and we make out our bills every week, at the end of eight
days we presented our account; but it appeared we had chosen an unlucky
moment, for at the first word on the subject, he sent us to all the
devils. It is true he had been playing the day before.”

“Playing the day before! And with whom?”

“Lord, who can say, monsieur? With some gentleman who was traveling this
way, to whom he proposed a game of LANSQUENET.”

“That’s it, then, and the foolish fellow lost all he had?”

“Even to his horse, monsieur; for when the gentleman was about to set
out, we perceived that his lackey was saddling Monsieur Porthos’s horse,
as well as his master’s. When we observed this to him, he told us all to
trouble ourselves about our own business, as this horse belonged to him.
We also informed Monsieur Porthos of what was going on; but he told us
we were scoundrels to doubt a gentleman’s word, and that as he had said
the horse was his, it must be so.”

“That’s Porthos all over,” murmured d’Artagnan.

“Then,” continued the host, “I replied that as from the moment we seemed
not likely to come to a good understanding with respect to payment, I
hoped that he would have at least the kindness to grant the favor of his
custom to my brother host of the Golden Eagle; but Monsieur Porthos
replied that, my house being the best, he should remain where he was.
This reply was too flattering to allow me to insist on his departure. I
confined myself then to begging him to give up his chamber, which is the
handsomest in the hotel, and to be satisfied with a pretty little room
on the third floor; but to this Monsieur Porthos replied that as he
every moment expected his mistress, who was one of the greatest ladies
in the court, I might easily comprehend that the chamber he did me the
honor to occupy in my house was itself very mean for the visit of such a
personage. Nevertheless, while acknowledging the truth of what he said,
I thought proper to insist; but without even giving himself the trouble
to enter into any discussion with me, he took one of his pistols, laid
it on his table, day and night, and said that at the first word that
should be spoken to him about removing, either within the house or out
of it, he would blow out the brains of the person who should be so
imprudent as to meddle with a matter which only concerned himself. Since
that time, monsieur, nobody entered his chamber but his servant.”

“What! Mousqueton is here, then?”

“Oh, yes, monsieur. Five days after your departure, he came back, and in
a very bad condition, too. It appears that he had met with
disagreeableness, likewise, on his journey. Unfortunately, he is more
nimble than his master; so that for the sake of his master, he puts us
all under his feet, and as he thinks we might refuse what he asked for,
he takes all he wants without asking at all.”

“The fact is,” said d’Artagnan, “I have always observed a great degree
of intelligence and devotedness in Mousqueton.”

“That is possible, monsieur; but suppose I should happen to be brought
in contact, even four times a year, with such intelligence and
devotedness--why, I should be a ruined man!”

“No, for Porthos will pay you.”

“Hum!” said the host, in a doubtful tone.

“The favorite of a great lady will not be allowed to be inconvenienced
for such a paltry sum as he owes you.”

“If I durst say what I believe on that head--”

“What you believe?”

“I ought rather to say, what I know.”

“What you know?”

“And even what I am sure of.”

“And of what are you so sure?”

“I would say that I know this great lady.”

“You?”

“Yes; I.”

“And how do you know her?”

“Oh, monsieur, if I could believe I might trust in your discretion.”

“Speak! By the word of a gentleman, you shall have no cause to repent of
your confidence.”

“Well, monsieur, you understand that uneasiness makes us do many
things.”

“What have you done?”

“Oh, nothing which was not right in the character of a creditor.”

“Well?”

“Monsieur Porthos gave us a note for his duchess, ordering us to put it
in the post. This was before his servant came. As he could not leave his
chamber, it was necessary to charge us with this commission.”

“And then?”

“Instead of putting the letter in the post, which is never safe, I took
advantage of the journey of one of my lads to Paris, and ordered him to
convey the letter to this duchess himself. This was fulfilling the
intentions of Monsieur Porthos, who had desired us to be so careful of
this letter, was it not?”

“Nearly so.”

“Well, monsieur, do you know who this great lady is?”

“No; I have heard Porthos speak of her, that’s all.”

“Do you know who this pretended duchess is?

“I repeat to you, I don’t know her.”

“Why, she is the old wife of a procurator* of the Chatelet, monsieur,
named Madame Coquenard, who, although she is at least fifty, still gives
herself jealous airs. It struck me as very odd that a princess should
live in the Rue aux Ours.”

    _*Attorney_

“But how do you know all this?”

“Because she flew into a great passion on receiving the letter, saying
that Monsieur Porthos was a weathercock, and that she was sure it was
for some woman he had received this wound.”

“Has he been wounded, then?”

“Oh, good Lord! What have I said?”

“You said that Porthos had received a sword cut.”

“Yes, but he has forbidden me so strictly to say so.”

“And why so.”

“Zounds, monsieur! Because he had boasted that he would perforate the
stranger with whom you left him in dispute; whereas the stranger, on the
contrary, in spite of all his rodomontades quickly threw him on his
back. As Monsieur Porthos is a very boastful man, he insists that nobody
shall know he has received this wound except the duchess, whom he
endeavored to interest by an account of his adventure.”

“It is a wound that confines him to his bed?”

“Ah, and a master stroke, too, I assure you. Your friend’s soul must
stick tight to his body.”

“Were you there, then?”

“Monsieur, I followed them from curiosity, so that I saw the combat
without the combatants seeing me.”

“And what took place?”

“Oh! The affair was not long, I assure you. They placed themselves on
guard; the stranger made a feint and a lunge, and that so rapidly that
when Monsieur Porthos came to the PARADE, he had already three inches of
steel in his breast. He immediately fell backward. The stranger placed
the point of his sword at his throat; and Monsieur Porthos, finding
himself at the mercy of his adversary, acknowledged himself conquered.
Upon which the stranger asked his name, and learning that it was
Porthos, and not d’Artagnan, he assisted him to rise, brought him back
to the hotel, mounted his horse, and disappeared.”

“So it was with Monsieur d’Artagnan this stranger meant to quarrel?”

“It appears so.”

“And do you know what has become of him?”

“No, I never saw him until that moment, and have not seen him since.”

“Very well; I know all that I wish to know. Porthos’s chamber is, you
say, on the first story, Number One?”

“Yes, monsieur, the handsomest in the inn--a chamber that I could have
let ten times over.”

“Bah! Be satisfied,” said d’Artagnan, laughing, “Porthos will pay you
with the money of the Duchess Coquenard.”

“Oh, monsieur, procurator’s wife or duchess, if she will but loosen her
pursestrings, it will be all the same; but she positively answered that
she was tired of the exigencies and infidelities of Monsieur Porthos,
and that she would not send him a denier.”

“And did you convey this answer to your guest?”

“We took good care not to do that; he would have found in what fashion
we had executed his commission.”

“So that he still expects his money?”

“Oh, Lord, yes, monsieur! Yesterday he wrote again; but it was his
servant who this time put the letter in the post.”

“Do you say the procurator’s wife is old and ugly?”

“Fifty at least, monsieur, and not at all handsome, according to
Pathaud’s account.”

“In that case, you may be quite at ease; she will soon be softened.
Besides, Porthos cannot owe you much.”

“How, not much! Twenty good pistoles, already, without reckoning the
doctor. He denies himself nothing; it may easily be seen he has been
accustomed to live well.”

“Never mind; if his mistress abandons him, he will find friends, I will
answer for it. So, my dear host, be not uneasy, and continue to take all
the care of him that his situation requires.”

“Monsieur has promised me not to open his mouth about the procurator’s
wife, and not to say a word of the wound?”

“That’s agreed; you have my word.”

“Oh, he would kill me!”

“Don’t be afraid; he is not so much of a devil as he appears.”

Saying these words, d’Artagnan went upstairs, leaving his host a little
better satisfied with respect to two things in which he appeared to be
very much interested--his debt and his life.

At the top of the stairs, upon the most conspicuous door of the
corridor, was traced in black ink a gigantic number “1.” d’Artagnan
knocked, and upon the bidding to come in which came from inside, he
entered the chamber.

Porthos was in bed, and was playing a game at LANSQUENET with
Mousqueton, to keep his hand in; while a spit loaded with partridges was
turning before the fire, and on each side of a large chimneypiece, over
two chafing dishes, were boiling two stewpans, from which exhaled a
double odor of rabbit and fish stews, rejoicing to the smell. In
addition to this he perceived that the top of a wardrobe and the marble
of a commode were covered with empty bottles.

At the sight of his friend, Porthos uttered a loud cry of joy; and
Mousqueton, rising respectfully, yielded his place to him, and went to
give an eye to the two stewpans, of which he appeared to have the
particular inspection.

“Ah, PARDIEU! Is that you?” said Porthos to d’Artagnan. “You are right
welcome. Excuse my not coming to meet you; but,” added he, looking at
d’Artagnan with a certain degree of uneasiness, “you know what has
happened to me?”

“No.”

“Has the host told you nothing, then?”

“I asked after you, and came up as soon as I could.”

Porthos seemed to breathe more freely.

“And what has happened to you, my dear Porthos?” continued d’Artagnan.

“Why, on making a thrust at my adversary, whom I had already hit three
times, and whom I meant to finish with the fourth, I put my foot on a
stone, slipped, and strained my knee.”

“Truly?”

“Honor! Luckily for the rascal, for I should have left him dead on the
spot, I assure you.”

“And what has became of him?”

“Oh, I don’t know; he had enough, and set off without waiting for the
rest. But you, my dear d’Artagnan, what has happened to you?”

“So that this strain of the knee,” continued d’Artagnan, “my dear
Porthos, keeps you in bed?”

“My God, that’s all. I shall be about again in a few days.”

“Why did you not have yourself conveyed to Paris? You must be cruelly
bored here.”

“That was my intention; but, my dear friend, I have one thing to confess
to you.”

“What’s that?”

“It is that as I was cruelly bored, as you say, and as I had the
seventy-five pistoles in my pocket which you had distributed to me, in
order to amuse myself I invited a gentleman who was traveling this way
to walk up, and proposed a cast of dice. He accepted my challenge, and,
my faith, my seventy-five pistoles passed from my pocket to his, without
reckoning my horse, which he won into the bargain. But you, my dear
d’Artagnan?”

“What can you expect, my dear Porthos; a man is not privileged in all
ways,” said d’Artagnan. “You know the proverb ‘Unlucky at play, lucky in
love.’ You are too fortunate in your love for play not to take its
revenge. What consequence can the reverses of fortune be to you? Have
you not, happy rogue that you are--have you not your duchess, who cannot
fail to come to your aid?”

“Well, you see, my dear d’Artagnan, with what ill luck I play,” replied
Porthos, with the most careless air in the world. “I wrote to her to
send me fifty louis or so, of which I stood absolutely in need on
account of my accident.”

“Well?”

“Well, she must be at her country seat, for she has not answered me.”

“Truly?”

“No; so I yesterday addressed another epistle to her, still more
pressing than the first. But you are here, my dear fellow, let us speak
of you. I confess I began to be very uneasy on your account.”

“But your host behaves very well toward you, as it appears, my dear
Porthos,” said d’Artagnan, directing the sick man’s attention to the
full stewpans and the empty bottles.

“So, so,” replied Porthos. “Only three or four days ago the impertinent
jackanapes gave me his bill, and I was forced to turn both him and his
bill out of the door; so that I am here something in the fashion of a
conqueror, holding my position, as it were, my conquest. So you see,
being in constant fear of being forced from that position, I am armed to
the teeth.”

“And yet,” said d’Artagnan, laughing, “it appears to me that from time
to time you must make SORTIES.” And he again pointed to the bottles and
the stewpans.

“Not I, unfortunately!” said Porthos. “This miserable strain confines me
to my bed; but Mousqueton forages, and brings in provisions. Friend
Mousqueton, you see that we have a reinforcement, and we must have an
increase of supplies.”

“Mousqueton,” said d’Artagnan, “you must render me a service.”

“What, monsieur?”

“You must give your recipe to Planchet. I may be besieged in my turn,
and I shall not be sorry for him to be able to let me enjoy the same
advantages with which you gratify your master.”

“Lord, monsieur! There is nothing more easy,” said Mousqueton, with a
modest air. “One only needs to be sharp, that’s all. I was brought up in
the country, and my father in his leisure time was something of a
poacher.”

“And what did he do the rest of his time?”

“Monsieur, he carried on a trade which I have always thought
satisfactory.”

“Which?”

“As it was a time of war between the Catholics and the Huguenots, and as
he saw the Catholics exterminate the Huguenots and the Huguenots
exterminate the Catholics--all in the name of religion--he adopted a
mixed belief which permitted him to be sometimes Catholic, sometimes a
Huguenot. Now, he was accustomed to walk with his fowling piece on his
shoulder, behind the hedges which border the roads, and when he saw a
Catholic coming alone, the Protestant religion immediately prevailed in
his mind. He lowered his gun in the direction of the traveler; then,
when he was within ten paces of him, he commenced a conversation which
almost always ended by the traveler’s abandoning his purse to save his
life. It goes without saying that when he saw a Huguenot coming, he felt
himself filled with such ardent Catholic zeal that he could not
understand how, a quarter of an hour before, he had been able to have
any doubts upon the superiority of our holy religion. For my part,
monsieur, I am Catholic--my father, faithful to his principles, having
made my elder brother a Huguenot.”

“And what was the end of this worthy man?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Oh, of the most unfortunate kind, monsieur. One day he was surprised in
a lonely road between a Huguenot and a Catholic, with both of whom he
had before had business, and who both knew him again; so they united
against him and hanged him on a tree. Then they came and boasted of
their fine exploit in the cabaret of the next village, where my brother
and I were drinking.”

“And what did you do?” said d’Artagnan.

“We let them tell their story out,” replied Mousqueton. “Then, as in
leaving the cabaret they took different directions, my brother went and
hid himself on the road of the Catholic, and I on that of the Huguenot.
Two hours after, all was over; we had done the business of both,
admiring the foresight of our poor father, who had taken the precaution
to bring each of us up in a different religion.”

“Well, I must allow, as you say, your father was a very intelligent
fellow. And you say in his leisure moments the worthy man was a
poacher?”

“Yes, monsieur, and it was he who taught me to lay a snare and ground a
line. The consequence is that when I saw our laborers, which did not at
all suit two such delicate stomachs as ours, I had recourse to a little
of my old trade. While walking near the wood of Monsieur le Prince, I
laid a few snare in the runs; and while reclining on the banks of his
Highness’s pieces of water, I slipped a few lines into his fish ponds.
So that now, thanks be to God, we do not want, as Monsieur can testify,
for partridges, rabbits, carp or eels--all light, wholesome food,
suitable for the sick.”

“But the wine,” said d’Artagnan, “who furnishes the wine? Your host?”

“That is to say, yes and no.”

“How yes and no?”

“He furnishes it, it is true, but he does not know that he has that
honor.”

“Explain yourself, Mousqueton; your conversation is full of instructive
things.”

“That is it, monsieur. It has so chanced that I met with a Spaniard in
my peregrinations who had seen many countries, and among them the New
World.”

“What connection can the New World have with the bottles which are on
the commode and the wardrobe?”

“Patience, monsieur, everything will come in its turn.”

“This Spaniard had in his service a lackey who had accompanied him in
his voyage to Mexico. This lackey was my compatriot; and we became the
more intimate from there being many resemblances of character between
us. We loved sporting of all kinds better than anything; so that he
related to me how in the plains of the Pampas the natives hunt the tiger
and the wild bull with simple running nooses which they throw to a
distance of twenty or thirty paces the end of a cord with such nicety;
but in face of the proof I was obliged to acknowledge the truth of the
recital. My friend placed a bottle at the distance of thirty paces, and
at each cast he caught the neck of the bottle in his running noose. I
practiced this exercise, and as nature has endowed me with some
faculties, at this day I can throw the lasso with any man in the world.
Well, do you understand, monsieur? Our host has a well-furnished cellar
the key of which never leaves him; only this cellar has a ventilating
hole. Now through this ventilating hole I throw my lasso, and as I now
know in which part of the cellar is the best wine, that’s my point for
sport. You see, monsieur, what the New World has to do with the bottles
which are on the commode and the wardrobe. Now, will you taste our wine,
and without prejudice say what you think of it?”

“Thank you, my friend, thank you; unfortunately, I have just
breakfasted.”

“Well,” said Porthos, “arrange the table, Mousqueton, and while we
breakfast, d’Artagnan will relate to us what has happened to him during
the ten days since he left us.”

“Willingly,” said d’Artagnan.

While Porthos and Mousqueton were breakfasting, with the appetites of
convalescents and with that brotherly cordiality which unites men in
misfortune, d’Artagnan related how Aramis, being wounded, was obliged to
stop at Crevecoeur, how he had left Athos fighting at Amiens with four
men who accused him of being a coiner, and how he, d’Artagnan, had been
forced to run the Comtes de Wardes through the body in order to reach
England.

But there the confidence of d’Artagnan stopped. He only added that on
his return from Great Britain he had brought back four magnificent
horses--one for himself, and one for each of his companions; then he
informed Porthos that the one intended for him was already installed in
the stable of the tavern.

At this moment Planchet entered, to inform his master that the horses
were sufficiently refreshed and that it would be possible to sleep at
Clermont.

As d’Artagnan was tolerably reassured with regard to Porthos, and as he
was anxious to obtain news of his two other friends, he held out his
hand to the wounded man, and told him he was about to resume his route
in order to continue his researches. For the rest, as he reckoned upon
returning by the same route in seven or eight days, if Porthos were
still at the Great St. Martin, he would call for him on his way.

Porthos replied that in all probability his sprain would not permit him
to depart yet awhile. Besides, it was necessary he should stay at
Chantilly to wait for the answer from his duchess.

D’Artagnan wished that answer might be prompt and favorable; and having
again recommended Porthos to the care of Mousqueton, and paid his bill
to the host, he resumed his route with Planchet, already relieved of one
of his led horses.




26 ARAMIS AND HIS THESIS


D’Artagnan had said nothing to Porthos of his wound or of his
procurator’s wife. Our Bearnais was a prudent lad, however young he
might be. Consequently he had appeared to believe all that the
vainglorious Musketeer had told him, convinced that no friendship will
hold out against a surprised secret. Besides, we feel always a sort of
mental superiority over those whose lives we know better than they
suppose. In his projects of intrigue for the future, and determined as
he was to make his three friends the instruments of his fortune,
d’Artagnan was not sorry at getting into his grasp beforehand the
invisible strings by which he reckoned upon moving them.

And yet, as he journeyed along, a profound sadness weighed upon his
heart. He thought of that young and pretty Mme. Bonacieux who was to
have paid him the price of his devotedness; but let us hasten to say
that this sadness possessed the young man less from the regret of the
happiness he had missed, than from the fear he entertained that some
serious misfortune had befallen the poor woman. For himself, he had no
doubt she was a victim of the cardinal’s vengeance; and, as was well
known, the vengeance of his Eminence was terrible. How he had found
grace in the eyes of the minister, he did not know; but without doubt M.
de Cavois would have revealed this to him if the captain of the Guards
had found him at home.

Nothing makes time pass more quickly or more shortens a journey than a
thought which absorbs in itself all the faculties of the organization of
him who thinks. External existence then resembles a sleep of which this
thought is the dream. By its influence, time has no longer measure,
space has no longer distance. We depart from one place, and arrive at
another, that is all. Of the interval passed, nothing remains in the
memory but a vague mist in which a thousand confused images of trees,
mountains, and landscapes are lost. It was as a prey to this
hallucination that d’Artagnan traveled, at whatever pace his horse
pleased, the six or eight leagues that separated Chantilly from
Crevecoeur, without his being able to remember on his arrival in the
village any of the things he had passed or met with on the road.

There only his memory returned to him. He shook his head, perceived the
cabaret at which he had left Aramis, and putting his horse to the trot,
he shortly pulled up at the door.

This time it was not a host but a hostess who received him. D’Artagnan
was a physiognomist. His eye took in at a glance the plump, cheerful
countenance of the mistress of the place, and he at once perceived there
was no occasion for dissembling with her, or of fearing anything from
one blessed with such a joyous physiognomy.

“My good dame,” asked d’Artagnan, “can you tell me what has become of
one of my friends, whom we were obliged to leave here about a dozen days
ago?”

“A handsome young man, three- or four-and-twenty years old, mild,
amiable, and well made?”

“That is he--wounded in the shoulder.”

“Just so. Well, monsieur, he is still here.”

“Ah, PARDIEU! My dear dame,” said d’Artagnan, springing from his horse,
and throwing the bridle to Planchet, “you restore me to life; where is
this dear Aramis? Let me embrace him, I am in a hurry to see him again.”

“Pardon, monsieur, but I doubt whether he can see you at this moment.”

“Why so? Has he a lady with him?”

“Jesus! What do you mean by that? Poor lad! No, monsieur, he has not a
lady with him.”

“With whom is he, then?”

“With the curate of Montdidier and the superior of the Jesuits of
Amiens.”

“Good heavens!” cried d’Artagnan, “is the poor fellow worse, then?”

“No, monsieur, quite the contrary; but after his illness grace touched
him, and he determined to take orders.”

“That’s it!” said d’Artagnan, “I had forgotten that he was only a
Musketeer for a time.”

“Monsieur still insists upon seeing him?”

“More than ever.”

“Well, monsieur has only to take the right-hand staircase in the
courtyard, and knock at Number Five on the second floor.”

D’Artagnan walked quickly in the direction indicated, and found one of
those exterior staircases that are still to be seen in the yards of our
old-fashioned taverns. But there was no getting at the place of sojourn
of the future abbe; the defiles of the chamber of Aramis were as well
guarded as the gardens of Armida. Bazin was stationed in the corridor,
and barred his passage with the more intrepidity that, after many years
of trial, Bazin found himself near a result of which he had ever been
ambitious.

In fact, the dream of poor Bazin had always been to serve a churchman;
and he awaited with impatience the moment, always in the future, when
Aramis would throw aside the uniform and assume the cassock. The
daily-renewed promise of the young man that the moment would not long be
delayed, had alone kept him in the service of a Musketeer--a service in
which, he said, his soul was in constant jeopardy.

Bazin was then at the height of joy. In all probability, this time his
master would not retract. The union of physical pain with moral
uneasiness had produced the effect so long desired. Aramis, suffering at
once in body and mind, had at length fixed his eyes and his thoughts
upon religion, and he had considered as a warning from heaven the double
accident which had happened to him; that is to say, the sudden
disappearance of his mistress and the wound in his shoulder.

It may be easily understood that in the present disposition of his
master nothing could be more disagreeable to Bazin than the arrival of
d’Artagnan, which might cast his master back again into that vortex of
mundane affairs which had so long carried him away. He resolved, then,
to defend the door bravely; and as, betrayed by the mistress of the inn,
he could not say that Aramis was absent, he endeavored to prove to the
newcomer that it would be the height of indiscretion to disturb his
master in his pious conference, which had commenced with the morning and
would not, as Bazin said, terminate before night.

But d’Artagnan took very little heed of the eloquent discourse of M.
Bazin; and as he had no desire to support a polemic discussion with his
friend’s valet, he simply moved him out of the way with one hand, and
with the other turned the handle of the door of Number Five. The door
opened, and d’Artagnan went into the chamber.

Aramis, in a black gown, his head enveloped in a sort of round flat cap,
not much unlike a CALOTTE, was seated before an oblong table, covered
with rolls of paper and enormous volumes in folio. At his right hand was
placed the superior of the Jesuits, and on his left the curate of
Montdidier. The curtains were half drawn, and only admitted the
mysterious light calculated for beatific reveries. All the mundane
objects that generally strike the eye on entering the room of a young
man, particularly when that young man is a Musketeer, had disappeared as
if by enchantment; and for fear, no doubt, that the sight of them might
bring his master back to ideas of this world, Bazin had laid his hands
upon sword, pistols, plumed hat, and embroideries and laces of all kinds
and sorts. In their stead d’Artagnan thought he perceived in an obscure
corner a discipline cord suspended from a nail in the wall.

At the noise made by d’Artagnan in entering, Aramis lifted up his head,
and beheld his friend; but to the great astonishment of the young man,
the sight of him did not produce much effect upon the Musketeer, so
completely was his mind detached from the things of this world.

“Good day, dear d’Artagnan,” said Aramis; “believe me, I am glad to see
you.”

“So am I delighted to see you,” said d’Artagnan, “although I am not yet
sure that it is Aramis I am speaking to.”

“To himself, my friend, to himself! But what makes you doubt it?”

“I was afraid I had made a mistake in the chamber, and that I had found
my way into the apartment of some churchman. Then another error seized
me on seeing you in company with these gentlemen--I was afraid you were
dangerously ill.”

The two men in black, who guessed d’Artagnan’s meaning, darted at him a
glance which might have been thought threatening; but d’Artagnan took no
heed of it.

“I disturb you, perhaps, my dear Aramis,” continued d’Artagnan, “for by
what I see, I am led to believe that you are confessing to these
gentlemen.”

Aramis colored imperceptibly. “You disturb me? Oh, quite the contrary,
dear friend, I swear; and as a proof of what I say, permit me to declare
I am rejoiced to see you safe and sound.”

“Ah, he’ll come round,” thought d’Artagnan; “that’s not bad!”

“This gentleman, who is my friend, has just escaped from a serious
danger,” continued Aramis, with unction, pointing to d’Artagnan with his
hand, and addressing the two ecclesiastics.

“Praise God, monsieur,” replied they, bowing together.

“I have not failed to do so, your Reverences,” replied the young man,
returning their salutation.

“You arrive in good time, dear d’Artagnan,” said Aramis, “and by taking
part in our discussion may assist us with your intelligence. Monsieur
the Principal of Amiens, Monsieur the Curate of Montdidier, and I are
arguing certain theological questions in which we have been much
interested; I shall be delighted to have your opinion.”

“The opinion of a swordsman can have very little weight,” replied
d’Artagnan, who began to be uneasy at the turn things were taking, “and
you had better be satisfied, believe me, with the knowledge of these
gentlemen.”

The two men in black bowed in their turn.

“On the contrary,” replied Aramis, “your opinion will be very valuable.
The question is this: Monsieur the Principal thinks that my thesis ought
to be dogmatic and didactic.”

“Your thesis! Are you then making a thesis?”

“Without doubt,” replied the Jesuit. “In the examination which precedes
ordination, a thesis is always a requisite.”

“Ordination!” cried d’Artagnan, who could not believe what the hostess
and Bazin had successively told him; and he gazed, half stupefied, upon
the three persons before him.

“Now,” continued Aramis, taking the same graceful position in his easy
chair that he would have assumed in bed, and complacently examining his
hand, which was as white and plump as that of a woman, and which he held
in the air to cause the blood to descend, “now, as you have heard,
d’Artagnan, Monsieur the Principal is desirous that my thesis should be
dogmatic, while I, for my part, would rather it should be ideal. This is
the reason why Monsieur the Principal has proposed to me the following
subject, which has not yet been treated upon, and in which I perceive
there is matter for magnificent elaboration-’UTRAQUE MANUS IN
BENEDICENDO CLERICIS INFERIORIBUS NECESSARIA EST.’”

D’Artagnan, whose erudition we are well acquainted with, evinced no more
interest on hearing this quotation than he had at that of M. de Treville
in allusion to the gifts he pretended that d’Artagnan had received from
the Duke of Buckingham.

“Which means,” resumed Aramis, that he might perfectly understand, “‘The
two hands are indispensable for priests of the inferior orders, when
they bestow the benediction.’”

“An admirable subject!” cried the Jesuit.

“Admirable and dogmatic!” repeated the curate, who, about as strong as
d’Artagnan with respect to Latin, carefully watched the Jesuit in order
to keep step with him, and repeated his words like an echo.

As to d’Artagnan, he remained perfectly insensible to the enthusiasm of
the two men in black.

“Yes, admirable! PRORSUS ADMIRABILE!” continued Aramis; “but which
requires a profound study of both the Scriptures and the Fathers. Now, I
have confessed to these learned ecclesiastics, and that in all humility,
that the duties of mounting guard and the service of the king have
caused me to neglect study a little. I should find myself, therefore,
more at my ease, FACILUS NATANS, in a subject of my own choice, which
would be to these hard theological questions what morals are to
metaphysics in philosophy.”

D’Artagnan began to be tired, and so did the curate.

“See what an exordium!” cried the Jesuit.

“Exordium,” repeated the curate, for the sake of saying something.
“QUEMADMODUM INTER COELORUM IMMNSITATEM.”

Aramis cast a glance upon d’Artagnan to see what effect all this
produced, and found his friend gaping enough to split his jaws.

“Let us speak French, my father,” said he to the Jesuit; “Monsieur
d’Artagnan will enjoy our conversation better.”

“Yes,” replied d’Artagnan; “I am fatigued with reading, and all this
Latin confuses me.”

“Certainly,” replied the Jesuit, a little put out, while the curate,
greatly delighted, turned upon d’Artagnan a look full of gratitude.
“Well, let us see what is to be derived from this gloss. Moses, the
servant of God-he was but a servant, please to understand-Moses blessed
with the hands; he held out both his arms while the Hebrews beat their
enemies, and then he blessed them with his two hands. Besides, what does
the Gospel say? IMPONITE MANUS, and not MANUM-place the HANDS, not the
HAND.”

“Place the HANDS,” repeated the curate, with a gesture.

“St. Peter, on the contrary, of whom the Popes are the successors,”
continued the Jesuit; “PORRIGE DIGITOS-present the fingers. Are you
there, now?”

“CERTES,” replied Aramis, in a pleased tone, “but the thing is subtle.”

“The FINGERS,” resumed the Jesuit, “St. Peter blessed with the FINGERS.
The Pope, therefore blesses with the fingers. And with how many fingers
does he bless? With THREE fingers, to be sure-one for the Father, one
for the Son, and one for the Holy Ghost.”

All crossed themselves. D’Artagnan thought it was proper to follow this
example.

“The Pope is the successor of St. Peter, and represents the three divine
powers; the rest-ORDINES INFERIORES-of the ecclesiastical hierarchy
bless in the name of the holy archangels and angels. The most humble
clerks such as our deacons and sacristans, bless with holy water
sprinklers, which resemble an infinite number of blessing fingers. There
is the subject simplified. ARGUMENTUM OMNI DENUDATUM ORNAMENTO. I could
make of that subject two volumes the size of this,” continued the
Jesuit; and in his enthusiasm he struck a St. Chrysostom in folio, which
made the table bend beneath its weight.

D’Artagnan trembled.

“CERTES,” said Aramis, “I do justice to the beauties of this thesis; but
at the same time I perceive it would be overwhelming for me. I had
chosen this text-tell me, dear d’Artagnan, if it is not to your
taste-’NON INUTILE EST DESIDERIUM IN OBLATIONE’; that is, ‘A little
regret is not unsuitable in an offering to the Lord.’”

“Stop there!” cried the Jesuit, “for that thesis touches closely upon
heresy. There is a proposition almost like it in the AUGUSTINUS of the
heresiarch Jansenius, whose book will sooner or later be burned by the
hands of the executioner. Take care, my young friend. You are inclining
toward false doctrines, my young friend; you will be lost.”

“You will be lost,” said the curate, shaking his head sorrowfully.

“You approach that famous point of free will which is a mortal rock. You
face the insinuations of the Pelagians and the semi-Pelagians.”

“But, my Reverend-” replied Aramis, a little amazed by the shower of
arguments that poured upon his head.

“How will you prove,” continued the Jesuit, without allowing him time to
speak, “that we ought to regret the world when we offer ourselves to
God? Listen to this dilemma: God is God, and the world is the devil. To
regret the world is to regret the devil; that is my conclusion.”

“And that is mine also,” said the curate.

“But, for heaven’s sake-” resumed Aramis.

“DESIDERAS DIABOLUM, unhappy man!” cried the Jesuit.

“He regrets the devil! Ah, my young friend,” added the curate, groaning,
“do not regret the devil, I implore you!”

D’Artagnan felt himself bewildered. It seemed to him as though he were
in a madhouse, and was becoming as mad as those he saw. He was, however,
forced to hold his tongue from not comprehending half the language they
employed.

“But listen to me, then,” resumed Aramis with politeness mingled with a
little impatience. “I do not say I regret; no, I will never pronounce
that sentence, which would not be orthodox.”

The Jesuit raised his hands toward heaven, and the curate did the same.

“No; but pray grant me that it is acting with an ill grace to offer to
the Lord only that with which we are perfectly disgusted! Don’t you
think so, d’Artagnan?”

“I think so, indeed,” cried he.

The Jesuit and the curate quite started from their chairs.

“This is the point of departure; it is a syllogism. The world is not
wanting in attractions. I quit the world; then I make a sacrifice. Now,
the Scripture says positively, ‘Make a sacrifice unto the Lord.’”

“That is true,” said his antagonists.

“And then,” said Aramis, pinching his ear to make it red, as he rubbed
his hands to make them white, “and then I made a certain RONDEAU upon it
last year, which I showed to Monsieur Voiture, and that great man paid
me a thousand compliments.”

“A RONDEAU!” said the Jesuit, disdainfully.

“A RONDEAU!” said the curate, mechanically.

“Repeat it! Repeat it!” cried d’Artagnan; “it will make a little
change.”

“Not so, for it is religious,” replied Aramis; “it is theology in
verse.”

“The devil!” said d’Artagnan.

“Here it is,” said Aramis, with a little look of diffidence, which,
however, was not exempt from a shade of hypocrisy:

“Vous qui pleurez un passe plein de charmes, Et qui trainez des jours
infortunes, Tous vos malheurs se verront termines, Quand a Dieu seul
vous offrirez vos larmes, Vous qui pleurez!”

“You who weep for pleasures fled, While dragging on a life of care, All
your woes will melt in air, If to God your tears are shed, You who
weep!”

d’Artagnan and the curate appeared pleased. The Jesuit persisted in his
opinion. “Beware of a profane taste in your theological style. What says
Augustine on this subject: ‘SEVERUS SIT CLERICORUM VERBO.’”

“Yes, let the sermon be clear,” said the curate.

“Now,” hastily interrupted the Jesuit, on seeing that his acolyte was
going astray, “now your thesis would please the ladies; it would have
the success of one of Monsieur Patru’s pleadings.”

“Please God!” cried Aramis, transported.

“There it is,” cried the Jesuit; “the world still speaks within you in a
loud voice, ALTISIMM VOCE. You follow the world, my young friend, and I
tremble lest grace prove not efficacious.”

“Be satisfied, my reverend father, I can answer for myself.”

“Mundane presumption!”

“I know myself, Father; my resolution is irrevocable.”

“Then you persist in continuing that thesis?”

“I feel myself called upon to treat that, and no other. I will see about
the continuation of it, and tomorrow I hope you will be satisfied with
the corrections I shall have made in consequence of your advice.”

“Work slowly,” said the curate; “we leave you in an excellent tone of
mind.”

“Yes, the ground is all sown,” said the Jesuit, “and we have not to fear
that one portion of the seed may have fallen upon stone, another upon
the highway, or that the birds of heaven have eaten the rest, AVES COELI
COMEDERUNT ILLAM.”

“Plague stifle you and your Latin!” said d’Artagnan, who began to feel
all his patience exhausted.

“Farewell, my son,” said the curate, “till tomorrow.”

“Till tomorrow, rash youth,” said the Jesuit. “You promise to become one
of the lights of the Church. Heaven grant that this light prove not a
devouring fire!”

D’Artagnan, who for an hour past had been gnawing his nails with
impatience, was beginning to attack the quick.

The two men in black rose, bowed to Aramis and d’Artagnan, and advanced
toward the door. Bazin, who had been standing listening to all this
controversy with a pious jubilation, sprang toward them, took the
breviary of the curate and the missal of the Jesuit, and walked
respectfully before them to clear their way.

Aramis conducted them to the foot of the stairs, and then immediately
came up again to d’Artagnan, whose senses were still in a state of
confusion.

When left alone, the two friends at first kept an embarrassed silence.
It however became necessary for one of them to break it first, and as
d’Artagnan appeared determined to leave that honor to his companion,
Aramis said, “you see that I am returned to my fundamental ideas.”

“Yes, efficacious grace has touched you, as that gentleman said just
now.”

“Oh, these plans of retreat have been formed for a long time. You have
often heard me speak of them, have you not, my friend?”

“Yes; but I confess I always thought you jested.”

“With such things! Oh, d’Artagnan!”

“The devil! Why, people jest with death.”

“And people are wrong, d’Artagnan; for death is the door which leads to
perdition or to salvation.”

“Granted; but if you please, let us not theologize, Aramis. You must
have had enough for today. As for me, I have almost forgotten the little
Latin I have ever known. Then I confess to you that I have eaten nothing
since ten o’clock this morning, and I am devilish hungry.”

“We will dine directly, my friend; only you must please to remember that
this is Friday. Now, on such a day I can neither eat flesh nor see it
eaten. If you can be satisfied with my dinner-it consists of cooked
tetragones and fruits.”

“What do you mean by tetragones?” asked d’Artagnan, uneasily.

“I mean spinach,” replied Aramis; “but on your account I will add some
eggs, and that is a serious infraction of the rule-for eggs are meat,
since they engender chickens.”

“This feast is not very succulent; but never mind, I will put up with it
for the sake of remaining with you.”

“I am grateful to you for the sacrifice,” said Aramis; “but if your body
be not greatly benefited by it, be assured your soul will.”

“And so, Aramis, you are decidedly going into the Church? What will our
two friends say? What will Monsieur de Treville say? They will treat you
as a deserter, I warn you.”

“I do not enter the Church; I re-enter it. I deserted the Church for the
world, for you know that I forced myself when I became a Musketeer.”

“I? I know nothing about it.”

“You don’t know I quit the seminary?”

“Not at all.”

“This is my story, then. Besides, the Scriptures say, ‘Confess
yourselves to one another,’ and I confess to you, d’Artagnan.”

“And I give you absolution beforehand. You see I am a good sort of a
man.”

“Do not jest about holy things, my friend.”

“Go on, then, I listen.”

“I had been at the seminary from nine years old; in three days I should
have been twenty. I was about to become an abbe, and all was arranged.
One evening I went, according to custom, to a house which I frequented
with much pleasure: when one is young, what can be expected?--one is
weak. An officer who saw me, with a jealous eye, reading the LIVES OF
THE SAINTS to the mistress of the house, entered suddenly and without
being announced. That evening I had translated an episode of Judith, and
had just communicated my verses to the lady, who gave me all sorts of
compliments, and leaning on my shoulder, was reading them a second time
with me. Her pose, which I must admit was rather free, wounded this
officer. He said nothing; but when I went out he followed, and quickly
came up with me. ‘Monsieur the Abbe,’ said he, ‘do you like blows with a
cane?’ ‘I cannot say, monsieur,’ answered I; ‘no one has ever dared to
give me any.’ ‘Well, listen to me, then, Monsieur the Abbe! If you
venture again into the house in which I have met you this evening, I
will dare it myself.’ I really think I must have been frightened. I
became very pale; I felt my legs fail me; I sought for a reply, but
could find none-I was silent. The officer waited for his reply, and
seeing it so long coming, he burst into a laugh, turned upon his heel,
and re-entered the house. I returned to the seminary.

“I am a gentleman born, and my blood is warm, as you may have remarked,
my dear d’Artagnan. The insult was terrible, and although unknown to the
rest of the world, I felt it live and fester at the bottom of my heart.
I informed my superiors that I did not feel myself sufficiently prepared
for ordination, and at my request the ceremony was postponed for a year.
I sought out the best fencing master in Paris, I made an agreement with
him to take a lesson every day, and every day for a year I took that
lesson. Then, on the anniversary of the day on which I had been
insulted, I hung my cassock on a peg, assumed the costume of a cavalier,
and went to a ball given by a lady friend of mine and to which I knew my
man was invited. It was in the Rue des France-Bourgeois, close to La
Force. As I expected, my officer was there. I went up to him as he was
singing a love ditty and looking tenderly at a lady, and interrupted him
exactly in the middle of the second couplet. ‘Monsieur,’ said I, ‘does
it still displease you that I should frequent a certain house of La Rue
Payenne? And would you still cane me if I took it into my head to
disobey you? The officer looked at me with astonishment, and then said,
‘What is your business with me, monsieur? I do not know you.’ ‘I am,’
said I, ‘the little abbe who reads LIVES OF THE SAINTS, and translates
Judith into verse.’ ‘Ah, ah! I recollect now,’ said the officer, in a
jeering tone; ‘well, what do you want with me?’ ‘I want you to spare
time to take a walk with me.’ ‘Tomorrow morning, if you like, with the
greatest pleasure.’ ‘No, not tomorrow morning, if you please, but
immediately.’ ‘If you absolutely insist.’ ‘I do insist upon it.’ ‘Come,
then. Ladies,’ said the officer, ‘do not disturb yourselves; allow me
time just to kill this gentleman, and I will return and finish the last
couplet.’

“We went out. I took him to the Rue Payenne, to exactly the same spot
where, a year before, at the very same hour, he had paid me the
compliment I have related to you. It was a superb moonlight night. We
immediately drew, and at the first pass I laid him stark dead.”

“The devil!” cried d’Artagnan.

“Now,” continued Aramis, “as the ladies did not see the singer come
back, and as he was found in the Rue Payenne with a great sword wound
through his body, it was supposed that I had accommodated him thus; and
the matter created some scandal which obliged me to renounce the cassock
for a time. Athos, whose acquaintance I made about that period, and
Porthos, who had in addition to my lessons taught me some effective
tricks of fence, prevailed upon me to solicit the uniform of a
Musketeer. The king entertained great regard for my father, who had
fallen at the siege of Arras, and the uniform was granted. You may
understand that the moment has come for me to re-enter the bosom of the
Church.”

“And why today, rather than yesterday or tomorrow? What has happened to
you today, to raise all these melancholy ideas?”

“This wound, my dear d’Artagnan, has been a warning to me from heaven.”

“This wound? Bah, it is now nearly healed, and I am sure it is not that
which gives you the most pain.”

“What, then?” said Aramis, blushing.

“You have one at heart, Aramis, one deeper and more painful--a wound
made by a woman.”

The eye of Aramis kindled in spite of himself.

“Ah,” said he, dissembling his emotion under a feigned carelessness, “do
not talk of such things, and suffer love pains? VANITAS VANITATUM!
According to your idea, then, my brain is turned. And for whom-for some
GRISETTE, some chambermaid with whom I have trifled in some garrison?
Fie!”

“Pardon, my dear Aramis, but I thought you carried your eyes higher.”

“Higher? And who am I, to nourish such ambition? A poor Musketeer, a
beggar, an unknown--who hates slavery, and finds himself ill-placed in
the world.”

“Aramis, Aramis!” cried d’Artagnan, looking at his friend with an air of
doubt.

“Dust I am, and to dust I return. Life is full of humiliations and
sorrows,” continued he, becoming still more melancholy; “all the ties
which attach him to life break in the hand of man, particularly the
golden ties. Oh, my dear d’Artagnan,” resumed Aramis, giving to his
voice a slight tone of bitterness, “trust me! Conceal your wounds when
you have any; silence is the last joy of the unhappy. Beware of giving
anyone the clue to your griefs; the curious suck our tears as flies suck
the blood of a wounded hart.”

“Alas, my dear Aramis,” said d’Artagnan, in his turn heaving a profound
sigh, “that is my story you are relating!”

“How?”

“Yes; a woman whom I love, whom I adore, has just been torn from me by
force. I do not know where she is or whither they have conducted her.
She is perhaps a prisoner; she is perhaps dead!”

“Yes, but you have at least this consolation, that you can say to
yourself she has not quit you voluntarily, that if you learn no news of
her, it is because all communication with you is interdicted; while I--”

“Well?”

“Nothing,” replied Aramis, “nothing.”

“So you renounce the world, then, forever; that is a settled thing--a
resolution registered!”

“Forever! You are my friend today; tomorrow you will be no more to me
than a shadow, or rather, even, you will no longer exist. As for the
world, it is a sepulcher and nothing else.”

“The devil! All this is very sad which you tell me.”

“What will you? My vocation commands me; it carries me away.”

D’Artagnan smiled, but made no answer.

Aramis continued, “And yet, while I do belong to the earth, I wish to
speak of you--of our friends.”

“And on my part,” said d’Artagnan, “I wished to speak of you, but I find
you so completely detached from everything! To love you cry, ‘Fie!
Friends are shadows! The world is a sepulcher!’”

“Alas, you will find it so yourself,” said Aramis, with a sigh.

“Well, then, let us say no more about it,” said d’Artagnan; “and let us
burn this letter, which, no doubt, announces to you some fresh
infidelity of your GRISETTE or your chambermaid.”

“What letter?” cried Aramis, eagerly.

“A letter which was sent to your abode in your absence, and which was
given to me for you.”

“But from whom is that letter?”

“Oh, from some heartbroken waiting woman, some desponding GRISETTE; from
Madame de Chevreuse’s chambermaid, perhaps, who was obliged to return to
Tours with her mistress, and who, in order to appear smart and
attractive, stole some perfumed paper, and sealed her letter with a
duchess’s coronet.”

“What do you say?”

“Hold! I must have lost it,” said the young man maliciously, pretending
to search for it. “But fortunately the world is a sepulcher; the men,
and consequently the women, are but shadows, and love is a sentiment to
which you cry, ‘Fie! Fie!’”

“d’Artagnan, d’Artagnan,” cried Aramis, “you are killing me!”

“Well, here it is at last!” said d’Artagnan, as he drew the letter from
his pocket.

Aramis made a bound, seized the letter, read it, or rather devoured it,
his countenance radiant.

“This same waiting maid seems to have an agreeable style,” said the
messenger, carelessly.

“Thanks, d’Artagnan, thanks!” cried Aramis, almost in a state of
delirium. “She was forced to return to Tours; she is not faithless; she
still loves me! Come, my friend, come, let me embrace you. Happiness
almost stifles me!”

The two friends began to dance around the venerable St. Chrysostom,
kicking about famously the sheets of the thesis, which had fallen on the
floor.

At that moment Bazin entered with the spinach and the omelet.

“Be off, you wretch!” cried Aramis, throwing his skullcap in his face.
“Return whence you came; take back those horrible vegetables, and that
poor kickshaw! Order a larded hare, a fat capon, mutton leg dressed with
garlic, and four bottles of old Burgundy.”

Bazin, who looked at his master, without comprehending the cause of this
change, in a melancholy manner, allowed the omelet to slip into the
spinach, and the spinach onto the floor.

“Now this is the moment to consecrate your existence to the King of
kings,” said d’Artagnan, “if you persist in offering him a civility. NON
INUTILE DESIDERIUM OBLATIONE.”

“Go to the devil with your Latin. Let us drink, my dear d’Artagnan,
MORBLEU! Let us drink while the wine is fresh! Let us drink heartily,
and while we do so, tell me a little of what is going on in the world
yonder.”




27 THE WIFE OF ATHOS


We have now to search for Athos,” said d’Artagnan to the vivacious
Aramis, when he had informed him of all that had passed since their
departure from the capital, and an excellent dinner had made one of them
forget his thesis and the other his fatigue.

“Do you think, then, that any harm can have happened to him?” asked
Aramis. “Athos is so cool, so brave, and handles his sword so
skillfully.”

“No doubt. Nobody has a higher opinion of the courage and skill of Athos
than I have; but I like better to hear my sword clang against lances
than against staves. I fear lest Athos should have been beaten down by
serving men. Those fellows strike hard, and don’t leave off in a hurry.
This is why I wish to set out again as soon as possible.”

“I will try to accompany you,” said Aramis, “though I scarcely feel in a
condition to mount on horseback. Yesterday I undertook to employ that
cord which you see hanging against the wall, but pain prevented my
continuing the pious exercise.”

“That’s the first time I ever heard of anybody trying to cure gunshot
wounds with cat-o’-nine-tails; but you were ill, and illness renders the
head weak, therefore you may be excused.”

“When do you mean to set out?”

“Tomorrow at daybreak. Sleep as soundly as you can tonight, and
tomorrow, if you can, we will take our departure together.”

“Till tomorrow, then,” said Aramis; “for iron-nerved as you are, you
must need repose.”

The next morning, when d’Artagnan entered Aramis’s chamber, he found him
at the window.

“What are you looking at?” asked d’Artagnan.

“My faith! I am admiring three magnificent horses which the stable boys
are leading about. It would be a pleasure worthy of a prince to travel
upon such horses.”

“Well, my dear Aramis, you may enjoy that pleasure, for one of those
three horses is yours.”

“Ah, bah! Which?”

“Whichever of the three you like, I have no preference.”

“And the rich caparison, is that mine, too?”

“Without doubt.”

“You laugh, d’Artagnan.”

“No, I have left off laughing, now that you speak French.”

“What, those rich holsters, that velvet housing, that saddle studded
with silver-are they all for me?”

“For you and nobody else, as the horse which paws the ground is mine,
and the other horse, which is caracoling, belongs to Athos.”

“PESTE! They are three superb animals!”

“I am glad they please you.”

“Why, it must have been the king who made you such a present.”

“Certainly it was not the cardinal; but don’t trouble yourself whence
they come, think only that one of the three is your property.”

“I choose that which the red-headed boy is leading.”

“It is yours!”

“Good heaven! That is enough to drive away all my pains; I could mount
him with thirty balls in my body. On my soul, handsome stirrups! HOLA,
Bazin, come here this minute.”

Bazin appeared on the threshold, dull and spiritless.

“That last order is useless,” interrupted d’Artagnan; “there are loaded
pistols in your holsters.”

Bazin sighed.

“Come, Monsieur Bazin, make yourself easy,” said d’Artagnan; “people of
all conditions gain the kingdom of heaven.”

“Monsieur was already such a good theologian,” said Bazin, almost
weeping; “he might have become a bishop, and perhaps a cardinal.”

“Well, but my poor Bazin, reflect a little. Of what use is it to be a
churchman, pray? You do not avoid going to war by that means; you see,
the cardinal is about to make the next campaign, helm on head and
partisan in hand. And Monsieur de Nogaret de la Valette, what do you say
of him? He is a cardinal likewise. Ask his lackey how often he has had
to prepare lint of him.”

“Alas!” sighed Bazin. “I know it, monsieur; everything is turned
topsy-turvy in the world nowadays.”

While this dialogue was going on, the two young men and the poor lackey
descended.

“Hold my stirrup, Bazin,” cried Aramis; and Aramis sprang into the
saddle with his usual grace and agility, but after a few vaults and
curvets of the noble animal his rider felt his pains come on so
insupportably that he turned pale and became unsteady in his seat.
D’Artagnan, who, foreseeing such an event, had kept his eye on him,
sprang toward him, caught him in his arms, and assisted him to his
chamber.

“That’s all right, my dear Aramis, take care of yourself,” said he; “I
will go alone in search of Athos.”

“You are a man of brass,” replied Aramis.

“No, I have good luck, that is all. But how do you mean to pass your
time till I come back? No more theses, no more glosses upon the fingers
or upon benedictions, hey?”

Aramis smiled. “I will make verses,” said he.

“Yes, I dare say; verses perfumed with the odor of the billet from the
attendant of Madame de Chevreuse. Teach Bazin prosody; that will console
him. As to the horse, ride him a little every day, and that will
accustom you to his maneuvers.”

“Oh, make yourself easy on that head,” replied Aramis. “You will find me
ready to follow you.”

They took leave of each other, and in ten minutes, after having
commended his friend to the cares of the hostess and Bazin, d’Artagnan
was trotting along in the direction of Amiens.

How was he going to find Athos? Should he find him at all? The position
in which he had left him was critical. He probably had succumbed. This
idea, while darkening his brow, drew several sighs from him, and caused
him to formulate to himself a few vows of vengeance. Of all his friends,
Athos was the eldest, and the least resembling him in appearance, in his
tastes and sympathies.

Yet he entertained a marked preference for this gentleman. The noble and
distinguished air of Athos, those flashes of greatness which from time
to time broke out from the shade in which he voluntarily kept himself,
that unalterable equality of temper which made him the most pleasant
companion in the world, that forced and cynical gaiety, that bravery
which might have been termed blind if it had not been the result of the
rarest coolness--such qualities attracted more than the esteem, more
than the friendship of d’Artagnan; they attracted his admiration.

Indeed, when placed beside M. de Treville, the elegant and noble
courtier, Athos in his most cheerful days might advantageously sustain a
comparison. He was of middle height; but his person was so admirably
shaped and so well proportioned that more than once in his struggles
with Porthos he had overcome the giant whose physical strength was
proverbial among the Musketeers. His head, with piercing eyes, a
straight nose, a chin cut like that of Brutus, had altogether an
indefinable character of grandeur and grace. His hands, of which he took
little care, were the despair of Aramis, who cultivated his with almond
paste and perfumed oil. The sound of his voice was at once penetrating
and melodious; and then, that which was inconceivable in Athos, who was
always retiring, was that delicate knowledge of the world and of the
usages of the most brilliant society--those manners of a high degree
which appeared, as if unconsciously to himself, in his least actions.

If a repast were on foot, Athos presided over it better than any other,
placing every guest exactly in the rank which his ancestors had earned
for him or that he had made for himself. If a question in heraldry were
started, Athos knew all the noble families of the kingdom, their
genealogy, their alliances, their coats of arms, and the origin of them.
Etiquette had no minutiae unknown to him. He knew what were the rights
of the great land owners. He was profoundly versed in hunting and
falconry, and had one day when conversing on this great art astonished
even Louis XIII himself, who took a pride in being considered a past
master therein.

Like all the great nobles of that period, Athos rode and fenced to
perfection. But still further, his education had been so little
neglected, even with respect to scholastic studies, so rare at this time
among gentlemen, that he smiled at the scraps of Latin which Aramis
sported and which Porthos pretended to understand. Two or three times,
even, to the great astonishment of his friends, he had, when Aramis
allowed some rudimental error to escape him, replaced a verb in its
right tense and a noun in its case. Besides, his probity was
irreproachable, in an age in which soldiers compromised so easily with
their religion and their consciences, lovers with the rigorous delicacy
of our era, and the poor with God’s Seventh Commandment. This Athos,
then, was a very extraordinary man.

And yet this nature so distinguished, this creature so beautiful, this
essence so fine, was seen to turn insensibly toward material life, as
old men turn toward physical and moral imbecility. Athos, in his hours
of gloom--and these hours were frequent--was extinguished as to the
whole of the luminous portion of him, and his brilliant side disappeared
as into profound darkness.

Then the demigod vanished; he remained scarcely a man. His head hanging
down, his eye dull, his speech slow and painful, Athos would look for
hours together at his bottle, his glass, or at Grimaud, who, accustomed
to obey him by signs, read in the faint glance of his master his least
desire, and satisfied it immediately. If the four friends were assembled
at one of these moments, a word, thrown forth occasionally with a
violent effort, was the share Athos furnished to the conversation. In
exchange for his silence Athos drank enough for four, and without
appearing to be otherwise affected by wine than by a more marked
constriction of the brow and by a deeper sadness.

D’Artagnan, whose inquiring disposition we are acquainted with, had
not--whatever interest he had in satisfying his curiosity on this
subject--been able to assign any cause for these fits, or for the
periods of their recurrence. Athos never received any letters; Athos
never had concerns which all his friends did not know.

It could not be said that it was wine which produced this sadness; for
in truth he only drank to combat this sadness, which wine however, as we
have said, rendered still darker. This excess of bilious humor could not
be attributed to play; for unlike Porthos, who accompanied the
variations of chance with songs or oaths, Athos when he won remained as
unmoved as when he lost. He had been known, in the circle of the
Musketeers, to win in one night three thousand pistoles; to lose them
even to the gold-embroidered belt for gala days, win all this again with
the addition of a hundred louis, without his beautiful eyebrow being
heightened or lowered half a line, without his hands losing their pearly
hue, without his conversation, which was cheerful that evening, ceasing
to be calm and agreeable.

Neither was it, as with our neighbors, the English, an atmospheric
influence which darkened his countenance; for the sadness generally
became more intense toward the fine season of the year. June and July
were the terrible months with Athos.

For the present he had no anxiety. He shrugged his shoulders when people
spoke of the future. His secret, then, was in the past, as had often
been vaguely said to d’Artagnan.

This mysterious shade, spread over his whole person, rendered still more
interesting the man whose eyes or mouth, even in the most complete
intoxication, had never revealed anything, however skillfully questions
had been put to him.

“Well,” thought d’Artagnan, “poor Athos is perhaps at this moment dead,
and dead by my fault--for it was I who dragged him into this affair, of
which he did not know the origin, of which he is ignorant of the result,
and from which he can derive no advantage.”

“Without reckoning, monsieur,” added Planchet to his master’s audibly
expressed reflections, “that we perhaps owe our lives to him. Do you
remember how he cried, ‘On, d’Artagnan, on, I am taken’? And when he had
discharged his two pistols, what a terrible noise he made with his
sword! One might have said that twenty men, or rather twenty mad devils,
were fighting.”

These words redoubled the eagerness of d’Artagnan, who urged his horse,
though he stood in need of no incitement, and they proceeded at a rapid
pace. About eleven o’clock in the morning they perceived Amiens, and at
half past eleven they were at the door of the cursed inn.

D’Artagnan had often meditated against the perfidious host one of those
hearty vengeances which offer consolation while they are hoped for. He
entered the hostelry with his hat pulled over his eyes, his left hand on
the pommel of the sword, and cracking his whip with his right hand.

“Do you remember me?” said he to the host, who advanced to greet him.

“I have not that honor, monseigneur,” replied the latter, his eyes
dazzled by the brilliant style in which d’Artagnan traveled.

“What, you don’t know me?”

“No, monseigneur.”

“Well, two words will refresh your memory. What have you done with that
gentleman against whom you had the audacity, about twelve days ago, to
make an accusation of passing false money?”

The host became as pale as death; for d’Artagnan had assumed a
threatening attitude, and Planchet modeled himself after his master.

“Ah, monseigneur, do not mention it!” cried the host, in the most
pitiable voice imaginable. “Ah, monseigneur, how dearly have I paid for
that fault, unhappy wretch as I am!”

“That gentleman, I say, what has become of him?”

“Deign to listen to me, monseigneur, and be merciful! Sit down, in
mercy!”

D’Artagnan, mute with anger and anxiety, took a seat in the threatening
attitude of a judge. Planchet glared fiercely over the back of his
armchair.

“Here is the story, monseigneur,” resumed the trembling host; “for I now
recollect you. It was you who rode off at the moment I had that
unfortunate difference with the gentleman you speak of.”

“Yes, it was I; so you may plainly perceive that you have no mercy to
expect if you do not tell me the whole truth.”

“Condescend to listen to me, and you shall know all.”

“I listen.”

“I had been warned by the authorities that a celebrated coiner of bad
money would arrive at my inn, with several of his companions, all
disguised as Guards or Musketeers. Monseigneur, I was furnished with a
description of your horses, your lackeys, your countenances--nothing was
omitted.”

“Go on, go on!” said d’Artagnan, who quickly understood whence such an
exact description had come.

“I took then, in conformity with the orders of the authorities, who sent
me a reinforcement of six men, such measures as I thought necessary to
get possession of the persons of the pretended coiners.”

“Again!” said d’Artagnan, whose ears chafed terribly under the
repetition of this word COINERs.

“Pardon me, monseigneur, for saying such things, but they form my
excuse. The authorities had terrified me, and you know that an innkeeper
must keep on good terms with the authorities.”

“But once again, that gentleman--where is he? What has become of him? Is
he dead? Is he living?”

“Patience, monseigneur, we are coming to it. There happened then that
which you know, and of which your precipitate departure,” added the
host, with an acuteness that did not escape d’Artagnan, “appeared to
authorize the issue. That gentleman, your friend, defended himself
desperately. His lackey, who, by an unforeseen piece of ill luck, had
quarreled with the officers, disguised as stable lads--”

“Miserable scoundrel!” cried d’Artagnan, “you were all in the plot,
then! And I really don’t know what prevents me from exterminating you
all.”

“Alas, monseigneur, we were not in the plot, as you will soon see.
Monsieur your friend (pardon for not calling him by the honorable name
which no doubt he bears, but we do not know that name), Monsieur your
friend, having disabled two men with his pistols, retreated fighting
with his sword, with which he disabled one of my men, and stunned me
with a blow of the flat side of it.”

“You villain, will you finish?” cried d’Artagnan, “Athos--what has
become of Athos?”

“While fighting and retreating, as I have told Monseigneur, he found the
door of the cellar stairs behind him, and as the door was open, he took
out the key, and barricaded himself inside. As we were sure of finding
him there, we left him alone.”

“Yes,” said d’Artagnan, “you did not really wish to kill; you only
wished to imprison him.”

“Good God! To imprison him, monseigneur? Why, he imprisoned himself, I
swear to you he did. In the first place he had made rough work of it;
one man was killed on the spot, and two others were severely wounded.
The dead man and the two wounded were carried off by their comrades, and
I have heard nothing of either of them since. As for myself, as soon as
I recovered my senses I went to Monsieur the Governor, to whom I related
all that had passed, and asked, what I should do with my prisoner.
Monsieur the Governor was all astonishment. He told me he knew nothing
about the matter, that the orders I had received did not come from him,
and that if I had the audacity to mention his name as being concerned in
this disturbance he would have me hanged. It appears that I had made a
mistake, monsieur, that I had arrested the wrong person, and that he
whom I ought to have arrested had escaped.”

“But Athos!” cried d’Artagnan, whose impatience was increased by the
disregard of the authorities, “Athos, where is he?”

“As I was anxious to repair the wrongs I had done the prisoner,” resumed
the innkeeper, “I took my way straight to the cellar in order to set him
at liberty. Ah, monsieur, he was no longer a man, he was a devil! To my
offer of liberty, he replied that it was nothing but a snare, and that
before he came out he intended to impose his own conditions. I told him
very humbly--for I could not conceal from myself the scrape I had got
into by laying hands on one of his Majesty’s Musketeers--I told him I
was quite ready to submit to his conditions.

“‘In the first place,’ said he, ‘I wish my lackey placed with me, fully
armed.’ We hastened to obey this order; for you will please to
understand, monsieur, we were disposed to do everything your friend
could desire. Monsieur Grimaud (he told us his name, although he does
not talk much)--Monsieur Grimaud, then, went down to the cellar, wounded
as he was; then his master, having admitted him, barricaded the door
afresh, and ordered us to remain quietly in our own bar.”

“But where is Athos now?” cried d’Artagnan. “Where is Athos?”

“In the cellar, monsieur.”

“What, you scoundrel! Have you kept him in the cellar all this time?”

“Merciful heaven! No, monsieur! We keep him in the cellar! You do not
know what he is about in the cellar. Ah! If you could but persuade him
to come out, monsieur, I should owe you the gratitude of my whole life;
I should adore you as my patron saint!”

“Then he is there? I shall find him there?”

“Without doubt you will, monsieur; he persists in remaining there. We
every day pass through the air hole some bread at the end of a fork, and
some meat when he asks for it; but alas! It is not of bread and meat of
which he makes the greatest consumption. I once endeavored to go down
with two of my servants; but he flew into terrible rage. I heard the
noise he made in loading his pistols, and his servant in loading his
musketoon. Then, when we asked them what were their intentions, the
master replied that he had forty charges to fire, and that he and his
lackey would fire to the last one before he would allow a single soul of
us to set foot in the cellar. Upon this I went and complained to the
governor, who replied that I only had what I deserved, and that it would
teach me to insult honorable gentlemen who took up their abode in my
house.”

“So that since that time--” replied d’Artagnan, totally unable to
refrain from laughing at the pitiable face of the host.

“So from that time, monsieur,” continued the latter, “we have led the
most miserable life imaginable; for you must know, monsieur, that all
our provisions are in the cellar. There is our wine in bottles, and our
wine in casks; the beer, the oil, and the spices, the bacon, and
sausages. And as we are prevented from going down there, we are forced
to refuse food and drink to the travelers who come to the house; so that
our hostelry is daily going to ruin. If your friend remains another week
in my cellar I shall be a ruined man.”

“And not more than justice, either, you ass! Could you not perceive by
our appearance that we were people of quality, and not coiners--say?”

“Yes, monsieur, you are right,” said the host. “But, hark, hark! There
he is!”

“Somebody has disturbed him, without doubt,” said d’Artagnan.

“But he must be disturbed,” cried the host; “Here are two English
gentlemen just arrived.”

“Well?”

“Well, the English like good wine, as you may know, monsieur; these have
asked for the best. My wife has perhaps requested permission of Monsieur
Athos to go into the cellar to satisfy these gentlemen; and he, as
usual, has refused. Ah, good heaven! There is the hullabaloo louder than
ever!”

D’Artagnan, in fact, heard a great noise on the side next the cellar. He
rose, and preceded by the host wringing his hands, and followed by
Planchet with his musketoon ready for use, he approached the scene of
action.

The two gentlemen were exasperated; they had had a long ride, and were
dying with hunger and thirst.

“But this is tyranny!” cried one of them, in very good French, though
with a foreign accent, “that this madman will not allow these good
people access to their own wine! Nonsense, let us break open the door,
and if he is too far gone in his madness, well, we will kill him!”

“Softly, gentlemen!” said d’Artagnan, drawing his pistols from his belt,
“you will kill nobody, if you please!”

“Good, good!” cried the calm voice of Athos, from the other side of the
door, “let them just come in, these devourers of little children, and we
shall see!”

Brave as they appeared to be, the two English gentlemen looked at each
other hesitatingly. One might have thought there was in that cellar one
of those famished ogres--the gigantic heroes of popular legends, into
whose cavern nobody could force their way with impunity.

There was a moment of silence; but at length the two Englishmen felt
ashamed to draw back, and the angrier one descended the five or six
steps which led to the cellar, and gave a kick against the door enough
to split a wall.

“Planchet,” said d’Artagnan, cocking his pistols, “I will take charge of
the one at the top; you look to the one below. Ah, gentlemen, you want
battle; and you shall have it.”

“Good God!” cried the hollow voice of Athos, “I can hear d’Artagnan, I
think.”

“Yes,” cried d’Artagnan, raising his voice in turn, “I am here, my
friend.”

“Ah, good, then,” replied Athos, “we will teach them, these door
breakers!”

The gentlemen had drawn their swords, but they found themselves taken
between two fires. They still hesitated an instant; but, as before,
pride prevailed, and a second kick split the door from bottom to top.

“Stand on one side, d’Artagnan, stand on one side,” cried Athos. “I am
going to fire!”

“Gentlemen,” exclaimed d’Artagnan, whom reflection never abandoned,
“gentlemen, think of what you are about. Patience, Athos! You are
running your heads into a very silly affair; you will be riddled. My
lackey and I will have three shots at you, and you will get as many from
the cellar. You will then have our swords, with which, I can assure you,
my friend and I can play tolerably well. Let me conduct your business
and my own. You shall soon have something to drink; I give you my word.”

“If there is any left,” grumbled the jeering voice of Athos.

The host felt a cold sweat creep down his back.

“How! ‘If there is any left!’” murmured he.

“What the devil! There must be plenty left,” replied d’Artagnan. “Be
satisfied of that; these two cannot have drunk all the cellar.
Gentlemen, return your swords to their scabbards.”

“Well, provided you replace your pistols in your belt.”

“Willingly.”

And d’Artagnan set the example. Then, turning toward Planchet, he made
him a sign to uncock his musketoon.

The Englishmen, convinced of these peaceful proceedings, sheathed their
swords grumblingly. The history of Athos’s imprisonment was then related
to them; and as they were really gentlemen, they pronounced the host in
the wrong.

“Now, gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, “go up to your room again; and in ten
minutes, I will answer for it, you shall have all you desire.”

The Englishmen bowed and went upstairs.

“Now I am alone, my dear Athos,” said d’Artagnan; “open the door, I beg
of you.”

“Instantly,” said Athos.

Then was heard a great noise of fagots being removed and of the groaning
of posts; these were the counterscarps and bastions of Athos, which the
besieged himself demolished.

An instant after, the broken door was removed, and the pale face of
Athos appeared, who with a rapid glance took a survey of the
surroundings.

D’Artagnan threw himself on his neck and embraced him tenderly. He then
tried to draw him from his moist abode, but to his surprise he perceived
that Athos staggered.

“You are wounded,” said he.

“I! Not at all. I am dead drunk, that’s all, and never did a man more
strongly set about getting so. By the Lord, my good host! I must at
least have drunk for my part a hundred and fifty bottles.”

“Mercy!” cried the host, “if the lackey has drunk only half as much as
the master, I am a ruined man.”

“Grimaud is a well-bred lackey. He would never think of faring in the
same manner as his master; he only drank from the cask. Hark! I don’t
think he put the faucet in again. Do you hear it? It is running now.”

D’Artagnan burst into a laugh which changed the shiver of the host into
a burning fever.

In the meantime, Grimaud appeared in his turn behind his master, with
the musketoon on his shoulder, and his head shaking. Like one of those
drunken satyrs in the pictures of Rubens. He was moistened before and
behind with a greasy liquid which the host recognized as his best olive
oil.

The four crossed the public room and proceeded to take possession of the
best apartment in the house, which d’Artagnan occupied with authority.

In the meantime the host and his wife hurried down with lamps into the
cellar, which had so long been interdicted to them and where a frightful
spectacle awaited them.

Beyond the fortifications through which Athos had made a breach in order
to get out, and which were composed of fagots, planks, and empty casks,
heaped up according to all the rules of the strategic art, they found,
swimming in puddles of oil and wine, the bones and fragments of all the
hams they had eaten; while a heap of broken bottles filled the whole
left-hand corner of the cellar, and a tun, the cock of which was left
running, was yielding, by this means, the last drop of its blood. “The
image of devastation and death,” as the ancient poet says, “reigned as
over a field of battle.”

Of fifty large sausages, suspended from the joists, scarcely ten
remained.

Then the lamentations of the host and hostess pierced the vault of the
cellar. D’Artagnan himself was moved by them. Athos did not even turn
his head.

To grief succeeded rage. The host armed himself with a spit, and rushed
into the chamber occupied by the two friends.

“Some wine!” said Athos, on perceiving the host.

“Some wine!” cried the stupefied host, “some wine? Why you have drunk
more than a hundred pistoles’ worth! I am a ruined man, lost,
destroyed!”

“Bah,” said Athos, “we were always dry.”

“If you had been contented with drinking, well and good; but you have
broken all the bottles.”

“You pushed me upon a heap which rolled down. That was your fault.”

“All my oil is lost!”

“Oil is a sovereign balm for wounds; and my poor Grimaud here was
obliged to dress those you had inflicted on him.”

“All my sausages are gnawed!”

“There is an enormous quantity of rats in that cellar.”

“You shall pay me for all this,” cried the exasperated host.

“Triple ass!” said Athos, rising; but he sank down again immediately. He
had tried his strength to the utmost. D’Artagnan came to his relief with
his whip in his hand.

The host drew back and burst into tears.

“This will teach you,” said d’Artagnan, “to treat the guests God sends
you in a more courteous fashion.”

“God? Say the devil!”

“My dear friend,” said d’Artagnan, “if you annoy us in this manner we
will all four go and shut ourselves up in your cellar, and we will see
if the mischief is as great as you say.”

“Oh, gentlemen,” said the host, “I have been wrong. I confess it, but
pardon to every sin! You are gentlemen, and I am a poor innkeeper. You
will have pity on me.”

“Ah, if you speak in that way,” said Athos, “you will break my heart,
and the tears will flow from my eyes as the wine flowed from the cask.
We are not such devils as we appear to be. Come hither, and let us
talk.”

The host approached with hesitation.

“Come hither, I say, and don’t be afraid,” continued Athos. “At the very
moment when I was about to pay you, I had placed my purse on the table.”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“That purse contained sixty pistoles; where is it?”

“Deposited with the justice; they said it was bad money.”

“Very well; get me my purse back and keep the sixty pistoles.”

“But Monseigneur knows very well that justice never lets go that which
it once lays hold of. If it were bad money, there might be some hopes;
but unfortunately, those were all good pieces.”

“Manage the matter as well as you can, my good man; it does not concern
me, the more so as I have not a livre left.”

“Come,” said d’Artagnan, “let us inquire further. Athos’s horse, where
is that?”

“In the stable.”

“How much is it worth?”

“Fifty pistoles at most.”

“It’s worth eighty. Take it, and there ends the matter.”

“What,” cried Athos, “are you selling my horse--my Bajazet? And pray
upon what shall I make my campaign; upon Grimaud?”

“I have brought you another,” said d’Artagnan.

“Another?”

“And a magnificent one!” cried the host.

“Well, since there is another finer and younger, why, you may take the
old one; and let us drink.”

“What?” asked the host, quite cheerful again.

“Some of that at the bottom, near the laths. There are twenty-five
bottles of it left; all the rest were broken by my fall. Bring six of
them.”

“Why, this man is a cask!” said the host, aside. “If he only remains
here a fortnight, and pays for what he drinks, I shall soon re-establish
my business.”

“And don’t forget,” said d’Artagnan, “to bring up four bottles of the
same sort for the two English gentlemen.”

“And now,” said Athos, “while they bring the wine, tell me, d’Artagnan,
what has become of the others, come!”

D’Artagnan related how he had found Porthos in bed with a strained knee,
and Aramis at a table between two theologians. As he finished, the host
entered with the wine ordered and a ham which, fortunately for him, had
been left out of the cellar.

“That’s well!” said Athos, filling his glass and that of his friend;
“here’s to Porthos and Aramis! But you, d’Artagnan, what is the matter
with you, and what has happened to you personally? You have a sad air.”

“Alas,” said d’Artagnan, “it is because I am the most unfortunate.”

“Tell me.”

“Presently,” said d’Artagnan.

“Presently! And why presently? Because you think I am drunk? D’Artagnan,
remember this! My ideas are never so clear as when I have had plenty of
wine. Speak, then, I am all ears.”

D’Artagnan related his adventure with Mme. Bonacieux. Athos listened to
him without a frown; and when he had finished, said, “Trifles, only
trifles!” That was his favorite word.

“You always say TRIFLES, my dear Athos!” said d’Artagnan, “and that come
very ill from you, who have never loved.”

The drink-deadened eye of Athos flashed out, but only for a moment; it
became as dull and vacant as before.

“That’s true,” said he, quietly, “for my part I have never loved.”

“Acknowledge, then, you stony heart,” said d’Artagnan, “that you are
wrong to be so hard upon us tender hearts.”

“Tender hearts! Pierced hearts!” said Athos.

“What do you say?”

“I say that love is a lottery in which he who wins, wins death! You are
very fortunate to have lost, believe me, my dear d’Artagnan. And if I
have any counsel to give, it is, always lose!”

“She seemed to love me so!”

“She SEEMED, did she?”

“Oh, she DID love me!”

“You child, why, there is not a man who has not believed, as you do,
that his mistress loved him, and there lives not a man who has not been
deceived by his mistress.”

“Except you, Athos, who never had one.”

“That’s true,” said Athos, after a moment’s silence, “that’s true! I
never had one! Let us drink!”

“But then, philosopher that you are,” said d’Artagnan, “instruct me,
support me. I stand in need of being taught and consoled.”

“Consoled for what?”

“For my misfortune.”

“Your misfortune is laughable,” said Athos, shrugging his shoulders; “I
should like to know what you would say if I were to relate to you a real
tale of love!”

“Which has happened to you?”

“Or one of my friends, what matters?”

“Tell it, Athos, tell it.”

“Better if I drink.”

“Drink and relate, then.”

“Not a bad idea!” said Athos, emptying and refilling his glass. “The two
things agree marvelously well.”

“I am all attention,” said d’Artagnan.

Athos collected himself, and in proportion as he did so, d’Artagnan saw
that he became pale. He was at that period of intoxication in which
vulgar drinkers fall on the floor and go to sleep. He kept himself
upright and dreamed, without sleeping. This somnambulism of drunkenness
had something frightful in it.

“You particularly wish it?” asked he.

“I pray for it,” said d’Artagnan.

“Be it then as you desire. One of my friends--one of my friends, please
to observe, not myself,” said Athos, interrupting himself with a
melancholy smile, “one of the counts of my province--that is to say, of
Berry--noble as a Dandolo or a Montmorency, at twenty-five years of age
fell in love with a girl of sixteen, beautiful as fancy can paint.
Through the ingenuousness of her age beamed an ardent mind, not of the
woman, but of the poet. She did not please; she intoxicated. She lived
in a small town with her brother, who was a curate. Both had recently
come into the country. They came nobody knew whence; but when seeing her
so lovely and her brother so pious, nobody thought of asking whence they
came. They were said, however, to be of good extraction. My friend, who
was seigneur of the country, might have seduced her, or taken her by
force, at his will--for he was master. Who would have come to the
assistance of two strangers, two unknown persons? Unfortunately he was
an honorable man; he married her. The fool! The ass! The idiot!”

“How so, if he love her?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Wait,” said Athos. “He took her to his chateau, and made her the first
lady in the province; and in justice it must be allowed that she
supported her rank becomingly.”

“Well?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Well, one day when she was hunting with her husband,” continued Athos,
in a low voice, and speaking very quickly, “she fell from her horse and
fainted. The count flew to her to help, and as she appeared to be
oppressed by her clothes, he ripped them open with his poniard, and in
so doing laid bare her shoulder. D’Artagnan,” said Athos, with a
maniacal burst of laughter, “guess what she had on her shoulder.”

“How can I tell?” said d’Artagnan.

“A FLEUR-DE-LIS,” said Athos. “She was branded.”

Athos emptied at a single draught the glass he held in his hand.

“Horror!” cried d’Artagnan. “What do you tell me?”

“Truth, my friend. The angel was a demon; the poor young girl had stolen
the sacred vessels from a church.”

“And what did the count do?”

“The count was of the highest nobility. He had on his estates the rights
of high and low tribunals. He tore the dress of the countess to pieces;
he tied her hands behind her, and hanged her on a tree.”

“Heavens, Athos, a murder?” cried d’Artagnan.

“No less,” said Athos, as pale as a corpse. “But methinks I need wine!”
and he seized by the neck the last bottle that was left, put it to his
mouth, and emptied it at a single draught, as he would have emptied an
ordinary glass.

Then he let his head sink upon his two hands, while d’Artagnan stood
before him, stupefied.

“That has cured me of beautiful, poetical, and loving women,” said
Athos, after a considerable pause, raising his head, and forgetting to
continue the fiction of the count. “God grant you as much! Let us
drink.”

“Then she is dead?” stammered d’Artagnan.

“PARBLEU!” said Athos. “But hold out your glass. Some ham, my boy, or we
can’t drink.”

“And her brother?” added d’Artagnan, timidly.

“Her brother?” replied Athos.

“Yes, the priest.”

“Oh, I inquired after him for the purpose of hanging him likewise; but
he was beforehand with me, he had quit the curacy the night before.”

“Was it ever known who this miserable fellow was?”

“He was doubtless the first lover and accomplice of the fair lady. A
worthy man, who had pretended to be a curate for the purpose of getting
his mistress married, and securing her a position. He has been hanged
and quartered, I hope.”

“My God, my God!” cried d’Artagnan, quite stunned by the relation of
this horrible adventure.

“Taste some of this ham, d’Artagnan; it is exquisite,” said Athos,
cutting a slice, which he placed on the young man’s plate.

“What a pity it is there were only four like this in the cellar. I could
have drunk fifty bottles more.”

D’Artagnan could no longer endure this conversation, which had made him
bewildered. Allowing his head to sink upon his two hands, he pretended
to sleep.

“These young fellows can none of them drink,” said Athos, looking at him
with pity, “and yet this is one of the best!”




28 THE RETURN


D’Artagnan was astounded by the terrible confidence of Athos; yet many
things appeared very obscure to him in this half revelation. In the
first place it had been made by a man quite drunk to one who was half
drunk; and yet, in spite of the incertainty which the vapor of three or
four bottles of Burgundy carries with it to the brain, d’Artagnan, when
awaking on the following morning, had all the words of Athos as present
to his memory as if they then fell from his mouth--they had been so
impressed upon his mind. All this doubt only gave rise to a more lively
desire of arriving at a certainty, and he went into his friend’s chamber
with a fixed determination of renewing the conversation of the preceding
evening; but he found Athos quite himself again--that is to say, the
most shrewd and impenetrable of men. Besides which, the Musketeer, after
having exchanged a hearty shake of the hand with him, broached the
matter first.

“I was pretty drunk yesterday, d’Artagnan,” said he, “I can tell that by
my tongue, which was swollen and hot this morning, and by my pulse,
which was very tremulous. I wager that I uttered a thousand
extravagances.”

While saying this he looked at his friend with an earnestness that
embarrassed him.

“No,” replied d’Artagnan, “if I recollect well what you said, it was
nothing out of the common way.”

“Ah, you surprise me. I thought I had told you a most lamentable story.”
And he looked at the young man as if he would read the bottom of his
heart.

“My faith,” said d’Artagnan, “it appears that I was more drunk than you,
since I remember nothing of the kind.”

Athos did not trust this reply, and he resumed; “you cannot have failed
to remark, my dear friend, that everyone has his particular kind of
drunkenness, sad or gay. My drunkenness is always sad, and when I am
thoroughly drunk my mania is to relate all the lugubrious stories which
my foolish nurse inculcated into my brain. That is my failing--a capital
failing, I admit; but with that exception, I am a good drinker.”

Athos spoke this in so natural a manner that d’Artagnan was shaken in
his conviction.

“It is that, then,” replied the young man, anxious to find out the
truth, “it is that, then, I remember as we remember a dream. We were
speaking of hanging.”

“Ah, you see how it is,” said Athos, becoming still paler, but yet
attempting to laugh; “I was sure it was so--the hanging of people is my
nightmare.”

“Yes, yes,” replied d’Artagnan. “I remember now; yes, it was about--stop
a minute--yes, it was about a woman.”

“That’s it,” replied Athos, becoming almost livid; “that is my grand
story of the fair lady, and when I relate that, I must be very drunk.”

“Yes, that was it,” said d’Artagnan, “the story of a tall, fair lady,
with blue eyes.”

“Yes, who was hanged.”

“By her husband, who was a nobleman of your acquaintance,” continued
d’Artagnan, looking intently at Athos.

“Well, you see how a man may compromise himself when he does not know
what he says,” replied Athos, shrugging his shoulders as if he thought
himself an object of pity. “I certainly never will get drunk again,
d’Artagnan; it is too bad a habit.”

D’Artagnan remained silent; and then changing the conversation all at
once, Athos said:

“By the by, I thank you for the horse you have brought me.”

“Is it to your mind?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Yes; but it is not a horse for hard work.”

“You are mistaken; I rode him nearly ten leagues in less than an hour
and a half, and he appeared no more distressed than if he had only made
the tour of the Place St. Sulpice.”

“Ah, you begin to awaken my regret.”

“Regret?”

“Yes; I have parted with him.”

“How?”

“Why, here is the simple fact. This morning I awoke at six o’clock. You
were still fast asleep, and I did not know what to do with myself; I was
still stupid from our yesterday’s debauch. As I came into the public
room, I saw one of our Englishman bargaining with a dealer for a horse,
his own having died yesterday from bleeding. I drew near, and found he
was bidding a hundred pistoles for a chestnut nag. ‘PARDIEU,’ said I,
‘my good gentleman, I have a horse to sell, too.’ ‘Ay, and a very fine
one! I saw him yesterday; your friend’s lackey was leading him.’ ‘Do you
think he is worth a hundred pistoles?’ ‘Yes! Will you sell him to me for
that sum?’ ‘No; but I will play for him.’ ‘What?’ ‘At dice.’ No sooner
said than done, and I lost the horse. Ah, ah! But please to observe I
won back the equipage,” cried Athos.

D’Artagnan looked much disconcerted.

“This vexes you?” said Athos.

“Well, I must confess it does,” replied d’Artagnan. “That horse was to
have identified us in the day of battle. It was a pledge, a remembrance.
Athos, you have done wrong.”

“But, my dear friend, put yourself in my place,” replied the Musketeer.
“I was hipped to death; and still further, upon my honor, I don’t like
English horses. If it is only to be recognized, why the saddle will
suffice for that; it is quite remarkable enough. As to the horse, we can
easily find some excuse for its disappearance. Why the devil! A horse is
mortal; suppose mine had had the glanders or the farcy?”

D’Artagnan did not smile.

“It vexes me greatly,” continued Athos, “that you attach so much
importance to these animals, for I am not yet at the end of my story.”

“What else have you done.”

“After having lost my own horse, nine against ten--see how near--I
formed an idea of staking yours.”

“Yes; but you stopped at the idea, I hope?”

“No; for I put it in execution that very minute.”

“And the consequence?” said d’Artagnan, in great anxiety.

“I threw, and I lost.”

“What, my horse?”

“Your horse, seven against eight; a point short--you know the proverb.”

“Athos, you are not in your right senses, I swear.”

“My dear lad, that was yesterday, when I was telling you silly stories,
it was proper to tell me that, and not this morning. I lost him then,
with all his appointments and furniture.”

“Really, this is frightful.”

“Stop a minute; you don’t know all yet. I should make an excellent
gambler if I were not too hot-headed; but I was hot-headed, just as if I
had been drinking. Well, I was not hot-headed then--”

“Well, but what else could you play for? You had nothing left?”

“Oh, yes, my friend; there was still that diamond left which sparkles on
your finger, and which I had observed yesterday.”

“This diamond!” said d’Artagnan, placing his hand eagerly on his ring.

“And as I am a connoisseur in such things, having had a few of my own
once, I estimated it at a thousand pistoles.”

“I hope,” said d’Artagnan, half dead with fright, “you made no mention
of my diamond?”

“On the contrary, my dear friend, this diamond became our only resource;
with it I might regain our horses and their harnesses, and even money to
pay our expenses on the road.”

“Athos, you make me tremble!” cried d’Artagnan.

“I mentioned your diamond then to my adversary, who had likewise
remarked it. What the devil, my dear, do you think you can wear a star
from heaven on your finger, and nobody observe it? Impossible!”

“Go on, go on, my dear fellow!” said d’Artagnan; “for upon my honor, you
will kill me with your indifference.”

“We divided, then, this diamond into ten parts of a hundred pistoles
each.”

“You are laughing at me, and want to try me!” said d’Artagnan, whom
anger began to take by the hair, as Minerva takes Achilles, in the
ILLIAD.

“No, I do not jest, MORDIEU! I should like to have seen you in my place!
I had been fifteen days without seeing a human face, and had been left
to brutalize myself in the company of bottles.”

“That was no reason for staking my diamond!” replied d’Artagnan, closing
his hand with a nervous spasm.

“Hear the end. Ten parts of a hundred pistoles each, in ten throws,
without revenge; in thirteen throws I had lost all--in thirteen throws.
The number thirteen was always fatal to me; it was on the thirteenth of
July that--”

“VENTREBLEU!” cried d’Artagnan, rising from the table, the story of the
present day making him forget that of the preceding one.

“Patience!” said Athos; “I had a plan. The Englishman was an original; I
had seen him conversing that morning with Grimaud, and Grimaud had told
me that he had made him proposals to enter into his service. I staked
Grimaud, the silent Grimaud, divided into ten portions.”

“Well, what next?” said d’Artagnan, laughing in spite of himself.

“Grimaud himself, understand; and with the ten parts of Grimaud, which
are not worth a ducatoon, I regained the diamond. Tell me, now, if
persistence is not a virtue?”

“My faith! But this is droll,” cried d’Artagnan, consoled, and holding
his sides with laughter.

“You may guess, finding the luck turned, that I again staked the
diamond.”

“The devil!” said d’Artagnan, becoming angry again.

“I won back your harness, then your horse, then my harness, then my
horse, and then I lost again. In brief, I regained your harness and then
mine. That’s where we are. That was a superb throw, so I left off
there.”

D’Artagnan breathed as if the whole hostelry had been removed from his
breast.

“Then the diamond is safe?” said he, timidly.

“Intact, my dear friend; besides the harness of your Bucephalus and
mine.”

“But what is the use of harnesses without horses?”

“I have an idea about them.”

“Athos, you make me shudder.”

“Listen to me. You have not played for a long time, d’Artagnan.”

“And I have no inclination to play.”

“Swear to nothing. You have not played for a long time, I said; you
ought, then, to have a good hand.”

“Well, what then?”

“Well; the Englishman and his companion are still here. I remarked that
he regretted the horse furniture very much. You appear to think much of
your horse. In your place I would stake the furniture against the
horse.”

“But he will not wish for only one harness.”

“Stake both, PARDIEU! I am not selfish, as you are.”

“You would do so?” said d’Artagnan, undecided, so strongly did the
confidence of Athos begin to prevail, in spite of himself.

“On my honor, in one single throw.”

“But having lost the horses, I am particularly anxious to preserve the
harnesses.”

“Stake your diamond, then.”

“This? That’s another matter. Never, never!”

“The devil!” said Athos. “I would propose to you to stake Planchet, but
as that has already been done, the Englishman would not, perhaps, be
willing.”

“Decidedly, my dear Athos,” said d’Artagnan, “I should like better not
to risk anything.”

“That’s a pity,” said Athos, coolly. “The Englishman is overflowing with
pistoles. Good Lord, try one throw! One throw is soon made!”

“And if I lose?”

“You will win.”

“But if I lose?”

“Well, you will surrender the harnesses.”

“Have with you for one throw!” said d’Artagnan.

Athos went in quest of the Englishman, whom he found in the stable,
examining the harnesses with a greedy eye. The opportunity was good. He
proposed the conditions--the two harnesses, either against one horse or
a hundred pistoles. The Englishman calculated fast; the two harnesses
were worth three hundred pistoles. He consented.

D’Artagnan threw the dice with a trembling hand, and turned up the
number three; his paleness terrified Athos, who, however, consented
himself with saying, “That’s a sad throw, comrade; you will have the
horses fully equipped, monsieur.”

The Englishman, quite triumphant, did not even give himself the trouble
to shake the dice. He threw them on the table without looking at them,
so sure was he of victory; d’Artagnan turned aside to conceal his ill
humor.

“Hold, hold, hold!” said Athos, wit his quiet tone; “that throw of the
dice is extraordinary. I have not seen such a one four times in my life.
Two aces!”

The Englishman looked, and was seized with astonishment. D’Artagnan
looked, and was seized with pleasure.

“Yes,” continued Athos, “four times only; once at the house of Monsieur
Crequy; another time at my own house in the country, in my chateau
at--when I had a chateau; a third time at Monsieur de Treville’s where
it surprised us all; and the fourth time at a cabaret, where it fell to
my lot, and where I lost a hundred louis and a supper on it.”

“Then Monsieur takes his horse back again,” said the Englishman.

“Certainly,” said d’Artagnan.

“Then there is no revenge?”

“Our conditions said, ‘No revenge,’ you will please to recollect.”

“That is true; the horse shall be restored to your lackey, monsieur.”

“A moment,” said Athos; “with your permission, monsieur, I wish to speak
a word with my friend.”

“Say on.”

Athos drew d’Artagnan aside.

“Well, Tempter, what more do you want with me?” said d’Artagnan. “You
want me to throw again, do you not?”

“No, I would wish you to reflect.”

“On what?”

“You mean to take your horse?”

“Without doubt.”

“You are wrong, then. I would take the hundred pistoles. You know you
have staked the harnesses against the horse or a hundred pistoles, at
your choice.”

“Yes.”

“Well, then, I repeat, you are wrong. What is the use of one horse for
us two? I could not ride behind. We should look like the two sons of
Anmon, who had lost their brother. You cannot think of humiliating me by
prancing along by my side on that magnificent charger. For my part, I
should not hesitate a moment; I should take the hundred pistoles. We
want money for our return to Paris.”

“I am much attached to that horse, Athos.”

“And there again you are wrong. A horse slips and injures a joint; a
horse stumbles and breaks his knees to the bone; a horse eats out of a
manger in which a glandered horse has eaten. There is a horse, while on
the contrary, the hundred pistoles feed their master.”

“But how shall we get back?”

“Upon our lackey’s horses, PARDIEU. Anybody may see by our bearing that
we are people of condition.”

“Pretty figures we shall cut on ponies while Aramis and Porthos caracole
on their steeds.”

“Aramis! Porthos!” cried Athos, and laughed aloud.

“What is it?” asked d’Artagnan, who did not at all comprehend the
hilarity of his friend.

“Nothing, nothing! Go on!”

“Your advice, then?”

“To take the hundred pistoles, d’Artagnan. With the hundred pistoles we
can live well to the end of the month. We have undergone a great deal of
fatigue, remember, and a little rest will do no harm.”

“I rest? Oh, no, Athos. Once in Paris, I shall prosecute my search for
that unfortunate woman!”

“Well, you may be assured that your horse will not be half so
serviceable to you for that purpose as good golden louis. Take the
hundred pistoles, my friend; take the hundred pistoles!”

D’Artagnan only required one reason to be satisfied. This last reason
appeared convincing. Besides, he feared that by resisting longer he
should appear selfish in the eyes of Athos. He acquiesced, therefore,
and chose the hundred pistoles, which the Englishman paid down on the
spot.

They then determined to depart. Peace with the landlord, in addition to
Athos’s old horse, cost six pistoles. D’Artagnan and Athos took the nags
of Planchet and Grimaud, and the two lackeys started on foot, carrying
the saddles on their heads.

However ill our two friends were mounted, they were soon far in advance
of their servants, and arrived at Creveccoeur. From a distance they
perceived Aramis, seated in a melancholy manner at his window, looking
out, like Sister Anne, at the dust in the horizon.

“HOLA, Aramis! What the devil are you doing there?” cried the two
friends.

“Ah, is that you, d’Artagnan, and you, Athos?” said the young man. “I
was reflecting upon the rapidity with which the blessings of this world
leave us. My English horse, which has just disappeared amid a cloud of
dust, has furnished me with a living image of the fragility of the
things of the earth. Life itself may be resolved into three words: ERAT,
EST, FUIT.”

“Which means--” said d’Artagnan, who began to suspect the truth.

“Which means that I have just been duped-sixty louis for a horse which
by the manner of his gait can do at least five leagues an hour.”

D’Artagnan and Athos laughed aloud.

“My dear d’Artagnan,” said Aramis, “don’t be too angry with me, I beg.
Necessity has no law; besides, I am the person punished, as that
rascally horsedealer has robbed me of fifty louis, at least. Ah, you
fellows are good managers! You ride on our lackey’s horses, and have
your own gallant steeds led along carefully by hand, at short stages.”

At the same instant a market cart, which some minutes before had
appeared upon the Amiens road, pulled up at the inn, and Planchet and
Grimaud came out of it with the saddles on their heads. The cart was
returning empty to Paris, and the two lackeys had agreed, for their
transport, to slake the wagoner’s thirst along the route.

“What is this?” said Aramis, on seeing them arrive. “Nothing but
saddles?”

“Now do you understand?” said Athos.

“My friends, that’s exactly like me! I retained my harness by instinct.
HOLA, Bazin! Bring my new saddle and carry it along with those of these
gentlemen.”

“And what have you done with your ecclesiastics?” asked d’Artagnan.

“My dear fellow, I invited them to a dinner the next day,” replied
Aramis. “They have some capital wine here--please to observe that in
passing. I did my best to make them drunk. Then the curate forbade me to
quit my uniform, and the Jesuit entreated me to get him made a
Musketeer.”

“Without a thesis?” cried d’Artagnan, “without a thesis? I demand the
suppression of the thesis.”

“Since then,” continued Aramis, “I have lived very agreeably. I have
begun a poem in verses of one syllable. That is rather difficult, but
the merit in all things consists in the difficulty. The matter is
gallant. I will read you the first canto. It has four hundred lines, and
lasts a minute.”

“My faith, my dear Aramis,” said d’Artagnan, who detested verses almost
as much as he did Latin, “add to the merit of the difficulty that of the
brevity, and you are sure that your poem will at least have two merits.”

“You will see,” continued Aramis, “that it breathes irreproachable
passion. And so, my friends, we return to Paris? Bravo! I am ready. We
are going to rejoin that good fellow, Porthos. So much the better. You
can’t think how I have missed him, the great simpleton. To see him so
self-satisfied reconciles me with myself. He would not sell his horse;
not for a kingdom! I think I can see him now, mounted upon his superb
animal and seated in his handsome saddle. I am sure he will look like
the Great Mogul!”

They made a halt for an hour to refresh their horses. Aramis discharged
his bill, placed Bazin in the cart with his comrades, and they set
forward to join Porthos.

They found him up, less pale than when d’Artagnan left him after his
first visit, and seated at a table on which, though he was alone, was
spread enough for four persons. This dinner consisted of meats nicely
dressed, choice wines, and superb fruit.

“Ah, PARDIEU!” said he, rising, “you come in the nick of time,
gentlemen. I was just beginning the soup, and you will dine with me.”

“Oh, oh!” said d’Artagnan, “Mousqueton has not caught these bottles with
his lasso. Besides, here is a piquant FRICANDEAU and a fillet of beef.”

“I am recruiting myself,” said Porthos, “I am recruiting myself. Nothing
weakens a man more than these devilish strains. Did you ever suffer from
a strain, Athos?”

“Never! Though I remember, in our affair of the Rue Ferou, I received a
sword wound which at the end of fifteen or eighteen days produced the
same effect.”

“But this dinner was not intended for you alone, Porthos?” said Aramis.

“No,” said Porthos, “I expected some gentlemen of the neighborhood, who
have just sent me word they could not come. You will take their places
and I shall not lose by the exchange. HOLA, Mousqueton, seats, and order
double the bottles!”

“Do you know what we are eating here?” said Athos, at the end of ten
minutes.

“PARDIEU!” replied d’Artagnan, “for my part, I am eating veal garnished
with shrimps and vegetables.”

“And I some lamb chops,” said Porthos.

“And I a plain chicken,” said Aramis.

“You are all mistaken, gentlemen,” answered Athos, gravely; “you are
eating horse.”

“Eating what?” said d’Artagnan.

“Horse!” said Aramis, with a grimace of disgust.

Porthos alone made no reply.

“Yes, horse. Are we not eating a horse, Porthos? And perhaps his saddle,
therewith.”

“No, gentlemen, I have kept the harness,” said Porthos.

“My faith,” said Aramis, “we are all alike. One would think we had
tipped the wink.”

“What could I do?” said Porthos. “This horse made my visitors ashamed of
theirs, and I don’t like to humiliate people.”

“Then your duchess is still at the waters?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Still,” replied Porthos. “And, my faith, the governor of the
province--one of the gentlemen I expected today--seemed to have such a
wish for him, that I gave him to him.”

“Gave him?” cried d’Artagnan.

“My God, yes, GAVE, that is the word,” said Porthos; “for the animal was
worth at least a hundred and fifty louis, and the stingy fellow would
only give me eighty.”

“Without the saddle?” said Aramis.

“Yes, without the saddle.”

“You will observe, gentlemen,” said Athos, “that Porthos has made the
best bargain of any of us.”

And then commenced a roar of laughter in which they all joined, to the
astonishment of poor Porthos; but when he was informed of the cause of
their hilarity, he shared it vociferously according to his custom.

“There is one comfort, we are all in cash,” said d’Artagnan.

“Well, for my part,” said Athos, “I found Aramis’s Spanish wine so good
that I sent on a hamper of sixty bottles of it in the wagon with the
lackeys. That has weakened my purse.”

“And I,” said Aramis, “imagined that I had given almost my last sou to
the church of Montdidier and the Jesuits of Amiens, with whom I had made
engagements which I ought to have kept. I have ordered Masses for
myself, and for you, gentlemen, which will be said, gentlemen, for which
I have not the least doubt you will be marvelously benefited.”

“And I,” said Porthos, “do you think my strain cost me nothing?--without
reckoning Mousqueton’s wound, for which I had to have the surgeon twice
a day, and who charged me double on account of that foolish Mousqueton
having allowed himself a ball in a part which people generally only show
to an apothecary; so I advised him to try never to get wounded there any
more.”

“Ay, ay!” said Athos, exchanging a smile with d’Artagnan and Aramis, “it
is very clear you acted nobly with regard to the poor lad; that is like
a good master.”

“In short,” said Porthos, “when all my expenses are paid, I shall have,
at most, thirty crowns left.”

“And I about ten pistoles,” said Aramis.

“Well, then it appears that we are the Croesuses of the society. How
much have you left of your hundred pistoles, d’Artagnan?”

“Of my hundred pistoles? Why, in the first place I gave you fifty.”

“You think so?”

“PARDIEU!”
       “Ah, that is true. I recollect.”

“Then I paid the host six.”

“What a brute of a host! Why did you give him six pistoles?”

“You told me to give them to him.”

“It is true; I am too good-natured. In brief, how much remains?”

“Twenty-five pistoles,” said d’Artagnan.

“And I,” said Athos, taking some small change from his pocket, “I--”

“You? Nothing!”

“My faith! So little that it is not worth reckoning with the general
stock.”

“Now, then, let us calculate how much we posses in all.”

“Porthos?”

“Thirty crowns.”

“Aramis?”

“Ten pistoles.”

“And you, d’Artagnan?”

“Twenty-five.”

“That makes in all?” said Athos.

“Four hundred and seventy-five livres,” said d’Artagnan, who reckoned
like Archimedes.

“On our arrival in Paris, we shall still have four hundred, besides the
harnesses,” said Porthos.

“But our troop horses?” said Aramis.

“Well, of the four horses of our lackeys we will make two for the
masters, for which we will draw lots. With the four hundred livres we
will make the half of one for one of the unmounted, and then we will
give the turnings out of our pockets to d’Artagnan, who has a steady
hand, and will go and play in the first gaming house we come to. There!”

“Let us dine, then,” said Porthos; “it is getting cold.”

The friends, at ease with regard to the future, did honor to the repast,
the remains of which were abandoned to Mousqueton, Bazin, Planchet, and
Grimaud.

On arriving in Paris, d’Artagnan found a letter from M. de Treville,
which informed him that, at his request, the king had promised that he
should enter the company of the Musketeers.

As this was the height of d’Artagnan’s worldly ambition--apart, be it
well understood, from his desire of finding Mme. Bonacieux--he ran, full
of joy, to seek his comrades, whom he had left only half an hour before,
but whom he found very sad and deeply preoccupied. They were assembled
in council at the residence of Athos, which always indicated an event of
some gravity. M. de Treville had intimated to them his Majesty’s fixed
intention to open the campaign on the first of May, and they must
immediately prepare their outfits.

The four philosophers looked at one another in a state of bewilderment.
M. de Treville never jested in matters relating to discipline.

“And what do you reckon your outfit will cost?” said d’Artagnan.

“Oh, we can scarcely say. We have made our calculations with Spartan
economy, and we each require fifteen hundred livres.”

“Four times fifteen makes sixty--six thousand livres,” said Athos.

“It seems to me,” said d’Artagnan, “with a thousand livres each--I do
not speak as a Spartan, but as a procurator--”

This word PROCURATOR roused Porthos. “Stop,” said he, “I have an idea.”

“Well, that’s something, for I have not the shadow of one,” said Athos
coolly; “but as to d’Artagnan, gentlemen, the idea of belonging to OURS
has driven him out of his senses. A thousand livres! For my part, I
declare I want two thousand.”

“Four times two makes eight,” then said Aramis; “it is eight thousand
that we want to complete our outfits, toward which, it is true, we have
already the saddles.”

“Besides,” said Athos, waiting till d’Artagnan, who went to thank
Monsieur de Treville, had shut the door, “besides, there is that
beautiful ring which beams from the finger of our friend. What the
devil! D’Artagnan is too good a comrade to leave his brothers in
embarrassment while he wears the ransom of a king on his finger.”




29 HUNTING FOR THE EQUIPMENTS


The most preoccupied of the four friends was certainly d’Artagnan,
although he, in his quality of Guardsman, would be much more easily
equipped than Messieurs the Musketeers, who were all of high rank; but
our Gascon cadet was, as may have been observed, of a provident and
almost avaricious character, and with that (explain the contradiction)
so vain as almost to rival Porthos. To this preoccupation of his vanity,
d’Artagnan at this moment joined an uneasiness much less selfish.
Notwithstanding all his inquiries respecting Mme. Bonacieux, he could
obtain no intelligence of her. M. de Treville had spoken of her to the
queen. The queen was ignorant where the mercer’s young wife was, but had
promised to have her sought for; but this promise was very vague and did
not at all reassure d’Artagnan.

Athos did not leave his chamber; he made up his mind not to take a
single step to equip himself.

“We have still fifteen days before us,” said he to his friends, “well,
if at the end of a fortnight I have found nothing, or rather if nothing
has come to find me, as I, too good a Catholic to kill myself with a
pistol bullet, I will seek a good quarrel with four of his Eminence’s
Guards or with eight Englishmen, and I will fight until one of them has
killed me, which, considering the number, cannot fail to happen. It will
then be said of me that I died for the king; so that I shall have
performed my duty without the expense of an outfit.”

Porthos continued to walk about with his hands behind him, tossing his
head and repeating, “I shall follow up on my idea.”

Aramis, anxious and negligently dressed, said nothing.

It may be seen by these disastrous details that desolation reigned in
the community.

The lackeys on their part, like the coursers of Hippolytus, shared the
sadness of their masters. Mousqueton collected a store of crusts; Bazin,
who had always been inclined to devotion, never quit the churches;
Planchet watched the flight of flies; and Grimaud, whom the general
distress could not induce to break the silence imposed by his master,
heaved sighs enough to soften the stones.

The three friends--for, as we have said, Athos had sworn not to stir a
foot to equip himself--went out early in the morning, and returned late
at night. They wandered about the streets, looking at the pavement as if
to see whether the passengers had not left a purse behind them. They
might have been supposed to be following tracks, so observant were they
wherever they went. When they met they looked desolately at one another,
as much as to say, “Have you found anything?”

However, as Porthos had first found an idea, and had thought of it
earnestly afterward, he was the first to act. He was a man of execution,
this worthy Porthos. D’Artagnan perceived him one day walking toward the
church of St. Leu, and followed him instinctively. He entered, after
having twisted his mustache and elongated his imperial, which always
announced on his part the most triumphant resolutions. As d’Artagnan
took some precautions to conceal himself, Porthos believed he had not
been seen. D’Artagnan entered behind him. Porthos went and leaned
against the side of a pillar. D’Artagnan, still unperceived, supported
himself against the other side.

There happened to be a sermon, which made the church very full of
people. Porthos took advantage of this circumstance to ogle the women.
Thanks to the cares of Mousqueton, the exterior was far from announcing
the distress of the interior. His hat was a little napless, his feather
was a little faded, his gold lace was a little tarnished, his laces were
a trifle frayed; but in the obscurity of the church these things were
not seen, and Porthos was still the handsome Porthos.

D’Artagnan observed, on the bench nearest to the pillar against which
Porthos leaned, a sort of ripe beauty, rather yellow and rather dry, but
erect and haughty under her black hood. The eyes of Porthos were
furtively cast upon this lady, and then roved about at large over the
nave.

On her side the lady, who from time to time blushed, darted with the
rapidity of lightning a glance toward the inconstant Porthos; and then
immediately the eyes of Porthos wandered anxiously. It was plain that
this mode of proceeding piqued the lady in the black hood, for she bit
her lips till they bled, scratched the end of her nose, and could not
sit still in her seat.

Porthos, seeing this, retwisted his mustache, elongated his imperial a
second time, and began to make signals to a beautiful lady who was near
the choir, and who not only was a beautiful lady, but still further, no
doubt, a great lady--for she had behind her a Negro boy who had brought
the cushion on which she knelt, and a female servant who held the
emblazoned bag in which was placed the book from which she read the
Mass.

The lady with the black hood followed through all their wanderings the
looks of Porthos, and perceived that they rested upon the lady with the
velvet cushion, the little Negro, and the maid-servant.

During this time Porthos played close. It was almost imperceptible
motions of his eyes, fingers placed upon the lips, little assassinating
smiles, which really did assassinate the disdained beauty.

Then she cried, “Ahem!” under cover of the MEA CULPA, striking her
breast so vigorously that everybody, even the lady with the red cushion,
turned round toward her. Porthos paid no attention. Nevertheless, he
understood it all, but was deaf.

The lady with the red cushion produced a great effect--for she was very
handsome--upon the lady with the black hood, who saw in her a rival
really to be dreaded; a great effect upon Porthos, who thought her much
prettier than the lady with the black hood; a great effect upon
d’Artagnan, who recognized in her the lady of Meung, of Calais, and of
Dover, whom his persecutor, the man with the scar, had saluted by the
name of Milady.

D’Artagnan, without losing sight of the lady of the red cushion,
continued to watch the proceedings of Porthos, which amused him greatly.
He guessed that the lady of the black hood was the procurator’s wife of
the Rue aux Ours, which was the more probable from the church of St. Leu
being not far from that locality.

He guessed, likewise, by induction, that Porthos was taking his revenge
for the defeat of Chantilly, when the procurator’s wife had proved so
refractory with respect to her purse.

Amid all this, d’Artagnan remarked also that not one countenance
responded to the gallantries of Porthos. There were only chimeras and
illusions; but for real love, for true jealousy, is there any reality
except illusions and chimeras?

The sermon over, the procurator’s wife advanced toward the holy font.
Porthos went before her, and instead of a finger, dipped his whole hand
in. The procurator’s wife smiled, thinking that it was for her Porthos
had put himself to this trouble; but she was cruelly and promptly
undeceived. When she was only about three steps from him, he turned his
head round, fixing his eyes steadfastly upon the lady with the red
cushion, who had risen and was approaching, followed by her black boy
and her woman.

When the lady of the red cushion came close to Porthos, Porthos drew his
dripping hand from the font. The fair worshipper touched the great hand
of Porthos with her delicate fingers, smiled, made the sign of the
cross, and left the church.

This was too much for the procurator’s wife; she doubted not there was
an intrigue between this lady and Porthos. If she had been a great lady
she would have fainted; but as she was only a procurator’s wife, she
contented herself saying to the Musketeer with concentrated fury, “Eh,
Monsieur Porthos, you don’t offer me any holy water?”

Porthos, at the sound of that voice, started like a man awakened from a
sleep of a hundred years.

“Ma-madame!” cried he; “is that you? How is your husband, our dear
Monsieur Coquenard? Is he still as stingy as ever? Where can my eyes
have been not to have seen you during the two hours of the sermon?”

“I was within two paces of you, monsieur,” replied the procurator’s
wife; “but you did not perceive me because you had no eyes but for the
pretty lady to whom you just now gave the holy water.”

Porthos pretended to be confused. “Ah,” said he, “you have remarked--”

“I must have been blind not to have seen.”

“Yes,” said Porthos, “that is a duchess of my acquaintance whom I have
great trouble to meet on account of the jealousy of her husband, and who
sent me word that she should come today to this poor church, buried in
this vile quarter, solely for the sake of seeing me.”

“Monsieur Porthos,” said the procurator’s wife, “will you have the
kindness to offer me your arm for five minutes? I have something to say
to you.”

“Certainly, madame,” said Porthos, winking to himself, as a gambler does
who laughs at the dupe he is about to pluck.

At that moment d’Artagnan passed in pursuit of Milady; he cast a passing
glance at Porthos, and beheld this triumphant look.

“Eh, eh!” said he, reasoning to himself according to the strangely easy
morality of that gallant period, “there is one who will be equipped in
good time!”

Porthos, yielding to the pressure of the arm of the procurator’s wife,
as a bark yields to the rudder, arrived at the cloister St. Magloire--a
little-frequented passage, enclosed with a turnstile at each end. In the
daytime nobody was seen there but mendicants devouring their crusts, and
children at play.

“Ah, Monsieur Porthos,” cried the procurator’s wife, when she was
assured that no one who was a stranger to the population of the locality
could either see or hear her, “ah, Monsieur Porthos, you are a great
conqueror, as it appears!”

“I, madame?” said Porthos, drawing himself up proudly; “how so?”

“The signs just now, and the holy water! But that must be a princess, at
least--that lady with her Negro boy and her maid!”

“My God! Madame, you are deceived,” said Porthos; “she is simply a
duchess.”

“And that running footman who waited at the door, and that carriage with
a coachman in grand livery who sat waiting on his seat?”

Porthos had seen neither the footman nor the carriage, but with the eye
of a jealous woman, Mme. Coquenard had seen everything.

Porthos regretted that he had not at once made the lady of the red
cushion a princess.

“Ah, you are quite the pet of the ladies, Monsieur Porthos!” resumed the
procurator’s wife, with a sigh.

“Well,” responded Porthos, “you may imagine, with the physique with
which nature has endowed me, I am not in want of good luck.”

“Good Lord, how quickly men forget!” cried the procurator’s wife,
raising her eyes toward heaven.

“Less quickly than the women, it seems to me,” replied Porthos; “for I,
madame, I may say I was your victim, when wounded, dying, I was
abandoned by the surgeons. I, the offspring of a noble family, who
placed reliance upon your friendship--I was near dying of my wounds at
first, and of hunger afterward, in a beggarly inn at Chantilly, without
you ever deigning once to reply to the burning letters I addressed to
you.”

“But, Monsieur Porthos,” murmured the procurator’s wife, who began to
feel that, to judge by the conduct of the great ladies of the time, she
was wrong.

“I, who had sacrificed for you the Baronne de--”

“I know it well.”

“The Comtesse de--”

“Monsieur Porthos, be generous!”

“You are right, madame, and I will not finish.”

“But it was my husband who would not hear of lending.”

“Madame Coquenard,” said Porthos, “remember the first letter you wrote
me, and which I preserve engraved in my memory.”

The procurator’s wife uttered a groan.

“Besides,” said she, “the sum you required me to borrow was rather
large.”

“Madame Coquenard, I gave you the preference. I had but to write to the
Duchesse--but I won’t repeat her name, for I am incapable of
compromising a woman; but this I know, that I had but to write to her
and she would have sent me fifteen hundred.”

The procurator’s wife shed a tear.

“Monsieur Porthos,” said she, “I can assure you that you have severely
punished me; and if in the time to come you should find yourself in a
similar situation, you have but to apply to me.”

“Fie, madame, fie!” said Porthos, as if disgusted. “Let us not talk
about money, if you please; it is humiliating.”

“Then you no longer love me!” said the procurator’s wife, slowly and
sadly.

Porthos maintained a majestic silence.

“And that is the only reply you make? Alas, I understand.”

“Think of the offense you have committed toward me, madame! It remains
HERE!” said Porthos, placing his hand on his heart, and pressing it
strongly.

“I will repair it, indeed I will, my dear Porthos.”

“Besides, what did I ask of you?” resumed Porthos, with a movement of
the shoulders full of good fellowship. “A loan, nothing more! After all,
I am not an unreasonable man. I know you are not rich, Madame Coquenard,
and that your husband is obliged to bleed his poor clients to squeeze a
few paltry crowns from them. Oh! If you were a duchess, a marchioness,
or a countess, it would be quite a different thing; it would be
unpardonable.”

The procurator’s wife was piqued.

“Please to know, Monsieur Porthos,” said she, “that my strongbox, the
strongbox of a procurator’s wife though it may be, is better filled than
those of your affected minxes.”

“That doubles the offense,” said Porthos, disengaging his arm from that
of the procurator’s wife; “for if you are rich, Madame Coquenard, then
there is no excuse for your refusal.”

“When I said rich,” replied the procurator’s wife, who saw that she had
gone too far, “you must not take the word literally. I am not precisely
rich, though I am pretty well off.”

“Hold, madame,” said Porthos, “let us say no more upon the subject, I
beg of you. You have misunderstood me, all sympathy is extinct between
us.”

“Ingrate that you are!”

“Ah! I advise you to complain!” said Porthos.

“Begone, then, to your beautiful duchess; I will detain you no longer.”

“And she is not to be despised, in my opinion.”

“Now, Monsieur Porthos, once more, and this is the last! Do you love me
still?”

“Ah, madame,” said Porthos, in the most melancholy tone he could assume,
“when we are about to enter upon a campaign--a campaign, in which my
presentiments tell me I shall be killed--”

“Oh, don’t talk of such things!” cried the procurator’s wife, bursting
into tears.

“Something whispers me so,” continued Porthos, becoming more and more
melancholy.

“Rather say that you have a new love.”

“Not so; I speak frankly to you. No object affects me; and I even feel
here, at the bottom of my heart, something which speaks for you. But in
fifteen days, as you know, or as you do not know, this fatal campaign is
to open. I shall be fearfully preoccupied with my outfit. Then I must
make a journey to see my family, in the lower part of Brittany, to
obtain the sum necessary for my departure.”

Porthos observed a last struggle between love and avarice.

“And as,” continued he, “the duchess whom you saw at the church has
estates near to those of my family, we mean to make the journey
together. Journeys, you know, appear much shorter when we travel two in
company.”

“Have you no friends in Paris, then, Monsieur Porthos?” said the
procurator’s wife.

“I thought I had,” said Porthos, resuming his melancholy air; “but I
have been taught my mistake.”

“You have some!” cried the procurator’s wife, in a transport that
surprised even herself. “Come to our house tomorrow. You are the son of
my aunt, consequently my cousin; you come from Noyon, in Picardy; you
have several lawsuits and no attorney. Can you recollect all that?”

“Perfectly, madame.”

“Come at dinnertime.”

“Very well.”

“And be upon your guard before my husband, who is rather shrewd,
notwithstanding his seventy-six years.”

“Seventy-six years! PESTE! That’s a fine age!” replied Porthos.

“A great age, you mean, Monsieur Porthos. Yes, the poor man may be
expected to leave me a widow, any hour,” continued she, throwing a
significant glance at Porthos. “Fortunately, by our marriage contract,
the survivor takes everything.”

“All?”

“Yes, all.”

“You are a woman of precaution, I see, my dear Madame Coquenard,” said
Porthos, squeezing the hand of the procurator’s wife tenderly.

“We are then reconciled, dear Monsieur Porthos?” said she, simpering.

“For life,” replied Porthos, in the same manner.

“Till we meet again, then, dear traitor!”

“Till we meet again, my forgetful charmer!”

“Tomorrow, my angel!”

“Tomorrow, flame of my life!”




30 D’ARTAGNAN AND THE ENGLISHMAN


D’Artagnan followed Milady without being perceived by her. He saw her
get into her carriage, and heard her order the coachman to drive to St.
Germain.

It was useless to try to keep pace on foot with a carriage drawn by two
powerful horses. D’Artagnan therefore returned to the Rue Ferou.

In the Rue de Seine he met Planchet, who had stopped before the house of
a pastry cook, and was contemplating with ecstasy a cake of the most
appetizing appearance.

He ordered him to go and saddle two horses in M. de Treville’s
stables--one for himself, d’Artagnan, and one for Planchet--and bring
them to Athos’s place. Once for all, Treville had placed his stable at
d’Artagnan’s service.

Planchet proceeded toward the Rue du Colombier, and d’Artagnan toward
the Rue Ferou. Athos was at home, emptying sadly a bottle of the famous
Spanish wine he had brought back with him from his journey into Picardy.
He made a sign for Grimaud to bring a glass for d’Artagnan, and Grimaud
obeyed as usual.

D’Artagnan related to Athos all that had passed at the church between
Porthos and the procurator’s wife, and how their comrade was probably by
that time in a fair way to be equipped.

“As for me,” replied Athos to this recital, “I am quite at my ease; it
will not be women that will defray the expense of my outfit.”

“Handsome, well-bred, noble lord as you are, my dear Athos, neither
princesses nor queens would be secure from your amorous solicitations.”

“How young this d’Artagnan is!” said Athos, shrugging his shoulders; and
he made a sign to Grimaud to bring another bottle.

At that moment Planchet put his head modestly in at the half-open door,
and told his master that the horses were ready.

“What horses?” asked Athos.

“Two horses that Monsieur de Treville lends me at my pleasure, and with
which I am now going to take a ride to St. Germain.”

“Well, and what are you going to do at St. Germain?” then demanded
Athos.

Then d’Artagnan described the meeting which he had at the church, and
how he had found that lady who, with the seigneur in the black cloak and
with the scar near his temple, filled his mind constantly.

“That is to say, you are in love with this lady as you were with Madame
Bonacieux,” said Athos, shrugging his shoulders contemptuously, as if he
pitied human weakness.

“I? not at all!” said d’Artagnan. “I am only curious to unravel the
mystery to which she is attached. I do not know why, but I imagine that
this woman, wholly unknown to me as she is, and wholly unknown to her as
I am, has an influence over my life.”

“Well, perhaps you are right,” said Athos. “I do not know a woman that
is worth the trouble of being sought for when she is once lost. Madame
Bonacieux is lost; so much the worse for her if she is found.”

“No, Athos, no, you are mistaken,” said d’Artagnan; “I love my poor
Constance more than ever, and if I knew the place in which she is, were
it at the end of the world, I would go to free her from the hands of her
enemies; but I am ignorant. All my researches have been useless. What is
to be said? I must divert my attention!”

“Amuse yourself with Milady, my dear d’Artagnan; I wish you may with all
my heart, if that will amuse you.”

“Hear me, Athos,” said d’Artagnan. “Instead of shutting yourself up here
as if you were under arrest, get on horseback and come and take a ride
with me to St. Germain.”

“My dear fellow,” said Athos, “I ride horses when I have any; when I
have none, I go afoot.”

“Well,” said d’Artagnan, smiling at the misanthropy of Athos, which from
any other person would have offended him, “I ride what I can get; I am
not so proud as you. So AU REVOIR, dear Athos.”

“AU REVOIR,” said the Musketeer, making a sign to Grimaud to uncork the
bottle he had just brought.

D’Artagnan and Planchet mounted, and took the road to St. Germain.

All along the road, what Athos had said respecting Mme. Bonacieux
recurred to the mind of the young man. Although d’Artagnan was not of a
very sentimental character, the mercer’s pretty wife had made a real
impression upon his heart. As he said, he was ready to go to the end of
the world to seek her; but the world, being round, has many ends, so
that he did not know which way to turn. Meantime, he was going to try to
find out Milady. Milady had spoken to the man in the black cloak;
therefore she knew him. Now, in the opinion of d’Artagnan, it was
certainly the man in the black cloak who had carried off Mme. Bonacieux
the second time, as he had carried her off the first. D’Artagnan then
only half-lied, which is lying but little, when he said that by going in
search of Milady he at the same time went in search of Constance.

Thinking of all this, and from time to time giving a touch of the spur
to his horse, d’Artagnan completed his short journey, and arrived at St.
Germain. He had just passed by the pavilion in which ten years later
Louis XIV was born. He rode up a very quiet street, looking to the right
and the left to see if he could catch any vestige of his beautiful
Englishwoman, when from the ground floor of a pretty house, which,
according to the fashion of the time, had no window toward the street,
he saw a face peep out with which he thought he was acquainted. This
person walked along the terrace, which was ornamented with flowers.
Planchet recognized him first.

“Eh, monsieur!” said he, addressing d’Artagnan, “don’t you remember that
face which is blinking yonder?”

“No,” said d’Artagnan, “and yet I am certain it is not the first time I
have seen that visage.”

“PARBLEU, I believe it is not,” said Planchet. “Why, it is poor Lubin,
the lackey of the Comte de Wardes--he whom you took such good care of a
month ago at Calais, on the road to the governor’s country house!”

“So it is!” said d’Artagnan; “I know him now. Do you think he would
recollect you?”

“My faith, monsieur, he was in such trouble that I doubt if he can have
retained a very clear recollection of me.”

“Well, go and talk with the boy,” said d’Artagnan, “and make out if you
can from his conversation whether his master is dead.”

Planchet dismounted and went straight up to Lubin, who did not at all
remember him, and the two lackeys began to chat with the best
understanding possible; while d’Artagnan turned the two horses into a
lane, went round the house, and came back to watch the conference from
behind a hedge of filberts.

At the end of an instant’s observation he heard the noise of a vehicle,
and saw Milady’s carriage stop opposite to him. He could not be
mistaken; Milady was in it. D’Artagnan leaned upon the neck of his
horse, in order that he might see without being seen.

Milady put her charming blond head out at the window, and gave her
orders to her maid.

The latter--a pretty girl of about twenty or twenty-two years, active
and lively, the true SOUBRETTE of a great lady--jumped from the step
upon which, according to the custom of the time, she was seated, and
took her way toward the terrace upon which d’Artagnan had perceived
Lubin.

D’Artagnan followed the soubrette with his eyes, and saw her go toward
the terrace; but it happened that someone in the house called Lubin, so
that Planchet remained alone, looking in all directions for the road
where d’Artagnan had disappeared.

The maid approached Planchet, whom she took for Lubin, and holding out a
little billet to him said, “For your master.”

“For my master?” replied Planchet, astonished.

“Yes, and important. Take it quickly.”

Thereupon she ran toward the carriage, which had turned round toward the
way it came, jumped upon the step, and the carriage drove off.

Planchet turned and returned the billet. Then, accustomed to passive
obedience, he jumped down from the terrace, ran toward the lane, and at
the end of twenty paces met d’Artagnan, who, having seen all, was coming
to him.

“For you, monsieur,” said Planchet, presenting the billet to the young
man.

“For me?” said d’Artagnan; “are you sure of that?”

“PARDIEU, monsieur, I can’t be more sure. The SOUBRETTE said, ‘For your
master.’ I have no other master but you; so--a pretty little lass, my
faith, is that SOUBRETTE!”

D’Artagnan opened the letter, and read these words:

“A person who takes more interest in you than she is willing to confess
wishes to know on what day it will suit you to walk in the forest?
Tomorrow, at the Hotel Field of the Cloth of Gold, a lackey in black and
red will wait for your reply.”

“Oh!” said d’Artagnan, “this is rather warm; it appears that Milady and
I are anxious about the health of the same person. Well, Planchet, how
is the good Monsieur de Wardes? He is not dead, then?”

“No, monsieur, he is as well as a man can be with four sword wounds in
his body; for you, without question, inflicted four upon the dear
gentleman, and he is still very weak, having lost almost all his blood.
As I said, monsieur, Lubin did not know me, and told me our adventure
from one end to the other.”

“Well done, Planchet! you are the king of lackeys. Now jump onto your
horse, and let us overtake the carriage.”

This did not take long. At the end of five minutes they perceived the
carriage drawn up by the roadside; a cavalier, richly dressed, was close
to the door.

The conversation between Milady and the cavalier was so animated that
d’Artagnan stopped on the other side of the carriage without anyone but
the pretty SOUBRETTE perceiving his presence.

The conversation took place in English--a language which d’Artagnan
could not understand; but by the accent the young man plainly saw that
the beautiful Englishwoman was in a great rage. She terminated it by an
action which left no doubt as to the nature of this conversation; this
was a blow with her fan, applied with such force that the little
feminine weapon flew into a thousand pieces.

The cavalier laughed aloud, which appeared to exasperate Milady still
more.

D’Artagnan thought this was the moment to interfere. He approached the
other door, and taking off his hat respectfully, said, “Madame, will you
permit me to offer you my services? It appears to me that this cavalier
has made you very angry. Speak one word, madame, and I take upon myself
to punish him for his want of courtesy.”

At the first word Milady turned, looking at the young man with
astonishment; and when he had finished, she said in very good French,
“Monsieur, I should with great confidence place myself under your
protection if the person with whom I quarrel were not my brother.”

“Ah, excuse me, then,” said d’Artagnan. “You must be aware that I was
ignorant of that, madame.”

“What is that stupid fellow troubling himself about?” cried the cavalier
whom Milady had designated as her brother, stooping down to the height
of the coach window. “Why does not he go about his business?”

“Stupid fellow yourself!” said d’Artagnan, stooping in his turn on the
neck of his horse, and answering on his side through the carriage
window. “I do not go on because it pleases me to stop here.”

The cavalier addressed some words in English to his sister.

“I speak to you in French,” said d’Artagnan; “be kind enough, then, to
reply to me in the same language. You are Madame’s brother, I learn--be
it so; but fortunately you are not mine.”

It might be thought that Milady, timid as women are in general, would
have interposed in this commencement of mutual provocations in order to
prevent the quarrel from going too far; but on the contrary, she threw
herself back in her carriage, and called out coolly to the coachman, “Go
on--home!”

The pretty SOUBRETTE cast an anxious glance at d’Artagnan, whose good
looks seemed to have made an impression on her.

The carriage went on, and left the two men facing each other; no
material obstacle separated them.

The cavalier made a movement as if to follow the carriage; but
d’Artagnan, whose anger, already excited, was much increased by
recognizing in him the Englishman of Amiens who had won his horse and
had been very near winning his diamond of Athos, caught at his bridle
and stopped him.

“Well, monsieur,” said he, “you appear to be more stupid than I am, for
you forget there is a little quarrel to arrange between us two.”

“Ah,” said the Englishman, “is it you, my master? It seems you must
always be playing some game or other.”

“Yes; and that reminds me that I have a revenge to take. We will see, my
dear monsieur, if you can handle a sword as skillfully as you can a dice
box.”

“You see plainly that I have no sword,” said the Englishman. “Do you
wish to play the braggart with an unarmed man?”

“I hope you have a sword at home; but at all events, I have two, and if
you like, I will throw with you for one of them.”

“Needless,” said the Englishman; “I am well furnished with such
playthings.”

“Very well, my worthy gentleman,” replied d’Artagnan, “pick out the
longest, and come and show it to me this evening.”

“Where, if you please?”

“Behind the Luxembourg; that’s a charming spot for such amusements as
the one I propose to you.”

“That will do; I will be there.”

“Your hour?”

“Six o’clock.”

“A PROPOS, you have probably one or two friends?”

“I have three, who would be honored by joining in the sport with me.”

“Three? Marvelous! That falls out oddly! Three is just my number!”

“Now, then, who are you?” asked the Englishman.

“I am Monsieur d’Artagnan, a Gascon gentleman, serving in the king’s
Musketeers. And you?”

“I am Lord de Winter, Baron Sheffield.”

“Well, then, I am your servant, Monsieur Baron,” said d’Artagnan,
“though you have names rather difficult to recollect.” And touching his
horse with the spur, he cantered back to Paris. As he was accustomed to
do in all cases of any consequence, d’Artagnan went straight to the
residence of Athos.

He found Athos reclining upon a large sofa, where he was waiting, as he
said, for his outfit to come and find him. He related to Athos all that
had passed, except the letter to M. de Wardes.

Athos was delighted to find he was going to fight an Englishman. We
might say that was his dream.

They immediately sent their lackeys for Porthos and Aramis, and on their
arrival made them acquainted with the situation.

Porthos drew his sword from the scabbard, and made passes at the wall,
springing back from time to time, and making contortions like a dancer.

Aramis, who was constantly at work at his poem, shut himself up in
Athos’s closet, and begged not to be disturbed before the moment of
drawing swords.

Athos, by signs, desired Grimaud to bring another bottle of wine.

D’Artagnan employed himself in arranging a little plan, of which we
shall hereafter see the execution, and which promised him some agreeable
