adventure, as might be seen by the smiles which from time to time passed
over his countenance, whose thoughtfulness they animated.




31 ENGLISH AND FRENCH


The hour having come, they went with their four lackeys to a spot behind
the Luxembourg given up to the feeding of goats. Athos threw a piece of
money to the goatkeeper to withdraw. The lackeys were ordered to act as
sentinels.

A silent party soon drew near to the same enclosure, entered, and joined
the Musketeers. Then, according to foreign custom, the presentations
took place.

The Englishmen were all men of rank; consequently the odd names of their
adversaries were for them not only a matter of surprise, but of
annoyance.

“But after all,” said Lord de Winter, when the three friends had been
named, “we do not know who you are. We cannot fight with such names;
they are names of shepherds.”

“Therefore your lordship may suppose they are only assumed names,” said
Athos.

“Which only gives us a greater desire to know the real ones,” replied
the Englishman.

“You played very willingly with us without knowing our names,” said
Athos, “by the same token that you won our horses.”

“That is true, but we then only risked our pistoles; this time we risk
our blood. One plays with anybody; but one fights only with equals.”

“And that is but just,” said Athos, and he took aside the one of the
four Englishmen with whom he was to fight, and communicated his name in
a low voice.

Porthos and Aramis did the same.

“Does that satisfy you?” said Athos to his adversary. “Do you find me of
sufficient rank to do me the honor of crossing swords with me?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said the Englishman, bowing.

“Well! now shall I tell you something?” added Athos, coolly.

“What?” replied the Englishman.

“Why, that is that you would have acted much more wisely if you had not
required me to make myself known.”

“Why so?”

“Because I am believed to be dead, and have reasons for wishing nobody
to know I am living; so that I shall be obliged to kill you to prevent
my secret from roaming over the fields.”

The Englishman looked at Athos, believing that he jested, but Athos did
not jest the least in the world.

“Gentlemen,” said Athos, addressing at the same time his companions and
their adversaries, “are we ready?”

“Yes!” answered the Englishmen and the Frenchmen, as with one voice.

“On guard, then!” cried Athos.

Immediately eight swords glittered in the rays of the setting sun, and
the combat began with an animosity very natural between men twice
enemies.

Athos fenced with as much calmness and method as if he had been
practicing in a fencing school.

Porthos, abated, no doubt, of his too-great confidence by his adventure
of Chantilly, played with skill and prudence. Aramis, who had the third
canto of his poem to finish, behaved like a man in haste.

Athos killed his adversary first. He hit him but once, but as he had
foretold, that hit was a mortal one; the sword pierced his heart.

Second, Porthos stretched his upon the grass with a wound through his
thigh, As the Englishman, without making any further resistance, then
surrendered his sword, Porthos took him up in his arms and bore him to
his carriage.

Aramis pushed his so vigorously that after going back fifty paces, the
man ended by fairly taking to his heels, and disappeared amid the
hooting of the lackeys.

As to d’Artagnan, he fought purely and simply on the defensive; and when
he saw his adversary pretty well fatigued, with a vigorous side thrust
sent his sword flying. The baron, finding himself disarmed, took two or
three steps back, but in this movement his foot slipped and he fell
backward.

D’Artagnan was over him at a bound, and said to the Englishman, pointing
his sword to his throat, “I could kill you, my Lord, you are completely
in my hands; but I spare your life for the sake of your sister.”

D’Artagnan was at the height of joy; he had realized the plan he had
imagined beforehand, whose picturing had produced the smiles we noted
upon his face.

The Englishman, delighted at having to do with a gentleman of such a
kind disposition, pressed d’Artagnan in his arms, and paid a thousand
compliments to the three Musketeers, and as Porthos’s adversary was
already installed in the carriage, and as Aramis’s had taken to his
heels, they had nothing to think about but the dead.

As Porthos and Aramis were undressing him, in the hope of finding his
wound not mortal, a large purse dropped from his clothes. D’Artagnan
picked it up and offered it to Lord de Winter.

“What the devil would you have me do with that?” said the Englishman.

“You can restore it to his family,” said d’Artagnan.

“His family will care much about such a trifle as that! His family will
inherit fifteen thousand louis a year from him. Keep the purse for your
lackeys.”

D’Artagnan put the purse into his pocket.

“And now, my young friend, for you will permit me, I hope, to give you
that name,” said Lord de Winter, “on this very evening, if agreeable to
you, I will present you to my sister, Milady Clarik, for I am desirous
that she should take you into her good graces; and as she is not in bad
odor at court, she may perhaps on some future day speak a word that will
not prove useless to you.”

D’Artagnan blushed with pleasure, and bowed a sign of assent.

At this time Athos came up to d’Artagnan.

“What do you mean to do with that purse?” whispered he.

“Why, I meant to pass it over to you, my dear Athos.”

“Me! why to me?”

“Why, you killed him! They are the spoils of victory.”

“I, the heir of an enemy!” said Athos; “for whom, then, do you take me?”

“It is the custom in war,” said d’Artagnan, “why should it not be the
custom in a duel?”

“Even on the field of battle, I have never done that.”

Porthos shrugged his shoulders; Aramis by a movement of his lips
endorsed Athos.

“Then,” said d’Artagnan, “let us give the money to the lackeys, as Lord
de Winter desired us to do.”

“Yes,” said Athos; “let us give the money to the lackeys--not to our
lackeys, but to the lackeys of the Englishmen.”

Athos took the purse, and threw it into the hand of the coachman. “For
you and your comrades.”

This greatness of spirit in a man who was quite destitute struck even
Porthos; and this French generosity, repeated by Lord de Winter and his
friend, was highly applauded, except by MM Grimaud, Bazin, Mousqueton
and Planchet.

Lord de Winter, on quitting d’Artagnan, gave him his sister’s address.
She lived in the Place Royale--then the fashionable quarter--at Number
6, and he undertook to call and take d’Artagnan with him in order to
introduce him. D’Artagnan appointed eight o’clock at Athos’s residence.

This introduction to Milady Clarik occupied the head of our Gascon
greatly. He remembered in what a strange manner this woman had hitherto
been mixed up in his destiny. According to his conviction, she was some
creature of the cardinal, and yet he felt himself invincibly drawn
toward her by one of those sentiments for which we cannot account. His
only fear was that Milady would recognize in him the man of Meung and of
Dover. Then she knew that he was one of the friends of M. de Treville,
and consequently, that he belonged body and soul to the king; which
would make him lose a part of his advantage, since when known to Milady
as he knew her, he played only an equal game with her. As to the
commencement of an intrigue between her and M. de Wardes, our
presumptuous hero gave but little heed to that, although the marquis was
young, handsome, rich, and high in the cardinal’s favor. It is not for
nothing we are but twenty years old, above all if we were born at
Tarbes.

D’Artagnan began by making his most splendid toilet, then returned to
Athos’s, and according to custom, related everything to him. Athos
listened to his projects, then shook his head, and recommended prudence
to him with a shade of bitterness.

“What!” said he, “you have just lost one woman, whom you call good,
charming, perfect; and here you are, running headlong after another.”

D’Artagnan felt the truth of this reproach.

“I loved Madame Bonacieux with my heart, while I only love Milady with
my head,” said he. “In getting introduced to her, my principal object is
to ascertain what part she plays at court.”

“The part she plays, PARDIEU! It is not difficult to divine that, after
all you have told me. She is some emissary of the cardinal; a woman who
will draw you into a snare in which you will leave your head.”

“The devil! my dear Athos, you view things on the dark side, methinks.”

“My dear fellow, I mistrust women. Can it be otherwise? I bought my
experience dearly--particularly fair women. Milady is fair, you say?”

“She has the most beautiful light hair imaginable!”

“Ah, my poor d’Artagnan!” said Athos.

“Listen to me! I want to be enlightened on a subject; then, when I shall
have learned what I desire to know, I will withdraw.”

“Be enlightened!” said Athos, phlegmatically.

Lord de Winter arrived at the appointed time; but Athos, being warned of
his coming, went into the other chamber. He therefore found d’Artagnan
alone, and as it was nearly eight o’clock he took the young man with
him.

An elegant carriage waited below, and as it was drawn by two excellent
horses, they were soon at the Place Royale.

Milady Clarik received d’Artagnan ceremoniously. Her hotel was
remarkably sumptuous, and while the most part of the English had quit,
or were about to quit, France on account of the war, Milady had just
been laying out much money upon her residence; which proved that the
general measure which drove the English from France did not affect her.

“You see,” said Lord de Winter, presenting d’Artagnan to his sister, “a
young gentleman who has held my life in his hands, and who has not
abused his advantage, although we have been twice enemies, although it
was I who insulted him, and although I am an Englishman. Thank him,
then, madame, if you have any affection for me.”

Milady frowned slightly; a scarcely visible cloud passed over her brow,
and so peculiar a smile appeared upon her lips that the young man, who
saw and observed this triple shade, almost shuddered at it.

The brother did not perceive this; he had turned round to play with
Milady’s favorite monkey, which had pulled him by the doublet.

“You are welcome, monsieur,” said Milady, in a voice whose singular
sweetness contrasted with the symptoms of ill-humor which d’Artagnan had
just remarked; “you have today acquired eternal rights to my gratitude.”

The Englishman then turned round and described the combat without
omitting a single detail. Milady listened with the greatest attention,
and yet it was easily to be perceived, whatever effort she made to
conceal her impressions, that this recital was not agreeable to her. The
blood rose to her head, and her little foot worked with impatience
beneath her robe.

Lord de Winter perceived nothing of this. When he had finished, he went
to a table upon which was a salver with Spanish wine and glasses. He
filled two glasses, and by a sign invited d’Artagnan to drink.

D’Artagnan knew it was considered disobliging by an Englishman to refuse
to pledge him. He therefore drew near to the table and took the second
glass. He did not, however, lose sight of Milady, and in a mirror he
perceived the change that came over her face. Now that she believed
herself to be no longer observed, a sentiment resembling ferocity
animated her countenance. She bit her handkerchief with her beautiful
teeth.

That pretty little SOUBRETTE whom d’Artagnan had already observed then
came in. She spoke some words to Lord de Winter in English, who
thereupon requested d’Artagnan’s permission to retire, excusing himself
on account of the urgency of the business that had called him away, and
charging his sister to obtain his pardon.

D’Artagnan exchanged a shake of the hand with Lord de Winter, and then
returned to Milady. Her countenance, with surprising mobility, had
recovered its gracious expression; but some little red spots on her
handkerchief indicated that she had bitten her lips till the blood came.
Those lips were magnificent; they might be said to be of coral.

The conversation took a cheerful turn. Milady appeared to have entirely
recovered. She told d’Artagnan that Lord de Winter was her
brother-in-law, and not her brother. She had married a younger brother
of the family, who had left her a widow with one child. This child was
the only heir to Lord de Winter, if Lord de Winter did not marry. All
this showed d’Artagnan that there was a veil which concealed something;
but he could not yet see under this veil.

In addition to this, after a half hour’s conversation d’Artagnan was
convinced that Milady was his compatriot; she spoke French with an
elegance and a purity that left no doubt on that head.

D’Artagnan was profuse in gallant speeches and protestations of
devotion. To all the simple things which escaped our Gascon, Milady
replied with a smile of kindness. The hour came for him to retire.
D’Artagnan took leave of Milady, and left the saloon the happiest of
men.

On the staircase he met the pretty SOUBRETTE, who brushed gently against
him as she passed, and then, blushing to the eyes, asked his pardon for
having touched him in a voice so sweet that the pardon was granted
instantly.

D’Artagnan came again on the morrow, and was still better received than
on the evening before. Lord de Winter was not at home; and it was Milady
who this time did all the honors of the evening. She appeared to take a
great interest in him, asked him whence he came, who were his friends,
and whether he had not sometimes thought of attaching himself to the
cardinal.

D’Artagnan, who, as we have said, was exceedingly prudent for a young
man of twenty, then remembered his suspicions regarding Milady. He
launched into a eulogy of his Eminence, and said that he should not have
failed to enter into the Guards of the cardinal instead of the king’s
Guards if he had happened to know M. de Cavois instead of M. de
Treville.

Milady changed the conversation without any appearance of affectation,
and asked d’Artagnan in the most careless manner possible if he had ever
been in England.

D’Artagnan replied that he had been sent thither by M. de Treville to
treat for a supply of horses, and that he had brought back four as
specimens.

Milady in the course of the conversation twice or thrice bit her lips;
she had to deal with a Gascon who played close.

At the same hour as on the preceding evening, d’Artagnan retired. In the
corridor he again met the pretty Kitty; that was the name of the
SOUBRETTE. She looked at him with an expression of kindness which it was
impossible to mistake; but d’Artagnan was so preoccupied by the mistress
that he noticed absolutely nothing but her.

D’Artagnan came again on the morrow and the day after that, and each day
Milady gave him a more gracious reception.

Every evening, either in the antechamber, the corridor, or on the
stairs, he met the pretty SOUBRETTE. But, as we have said, d’Artagnan
paid no attention to this persistence of poor Kitty.




32 A PROCURATOR’S DINNER


However brilliant had been the part played by Porthos in the duel, it
had not made him forget the dinner of the procurator’s wife.

On the morrow he received the last touches of Mousqueton’s brush for an
hour, and took his way toward the Rue aux Ours with the steps of a man
who was doubly in favor with fortune.

His heart beat, but not like d’Artagnan’s with a young and impatient
love. No; a more material interest stirred his blood. He was about at
last to pass that mysterious threshold, to climb those unknown stairs by
which, one by one, the old crowns of M. Coquenard had ascended. He was
about to see in reality a certain coffer of which he had twenty times
beheld the image in his dreams--a coffer long and deep, locked, bolted,
fastened in the wall; a coffer of which he had so often heard, and which
the hands--a little wrinkled, it is true, but still not without
elegance--of the procurator’s wife were about to open to his admiring
looks.

And then he--a wanderer on the earth, a man without fortune, a man
without family, a soldier accustomed to inns, cabarets, taverns, and
restaurants, a lover of wine forced to depend upon chance treats--was
about to partake of family meals, to enjoy the pleasures of a
comfortable establishment, and to give himself up to those little
attentions which “the harder one is, the more they please,” as old
soldiers say.

To come in the capacity of a cousin, and seat himself every day at a
good table; to smooth the yellow, wrinkled brow of the old procurator;
to pluck the clerks a little by teaching them BASSETTE, PASSE-DIX, and
LANSQUENET, in their utmost nicety, and winning from them, by way of fee
for the lesson he would give them in an hour, their savings of a
month--all this was enormously delightful to Porthos.

The Musketeer could not forget the evil reports which then prevailed,
and which indeed have survived them, of the procurators of the
period--meanness, stinginess, fasts; but as, after all, excepting some
few acts of economy which Porthos had always found very unseasonable,
the procurator’s wife had been tolerably liberal--that is, be it
understood, for a procurator’s wife--he hoped to see a household of a
highly comfortable kind.

And yet, at the very door the Musketeer began to entertain some doubts.
The approach was not such as to prepossess people--an ill-smelling, dark
passage, a staircase half-lighted by bars through which stole a glimmer
from a neighboring yard; on the first floor a low door studded with
enormous nails, like the principal gate of the Grand Chatelet.

Porthos knocked with his hand. A tall, pale clerk, his face shaded by a
forest of virgin hair, opened the door, and bowed with the air of a man
forced at once to respect in another lofty stature, which indicated
strength, the military dress, which indicated rank, and a ruddy
countenance, which indicated familiarity with good living.

A shorter clerk came behind the first, a taller clerk behind the second,
a stripling of a dozen years rising behind the third. In all, three
clerks and a half, which, for the time, argued a very extensive
clientage.

Although the Musketeer was not expected before one o’clock, the
procurator’s wife had been on the watch ever since midday, reckoning
that the heart, or perhaps the stomach, of her lover would bring him
before his time.

Mme. Coquenard therefore entered the office from the house at the same
moment her guest entered from the stairs, and the appearance of the
worthy lady relieved him from an awkward embarrassment. The clerks
surveyed him with great curiosity, and he, not knowing well what to say
to this ascending and descending scale, remained tongue-tied.

“It is my cousin!” cried the procurator’s wife. “Come in, come in,
Monsieur Porthos!”

The name of Porthos produced its effect upon the clerks, who began to
laugh; but Porthos turned sharply round, and every countenance quickly
recovered its gravity.

They reached the office of the procurator after having passed through
the antechamber in which the clerks were, and the study in which they
ought to have been. This last apartment was a sort of dark room,
littered with papers. On quitting the study they left the kitchen on the
right, and entered the reception room.

All these rooms, which communicated with one another, did not inspire
Porthos favorably. Words might be heard at a distance through all these
open doors. Then, while passing, he had cast a rapid, investigating
glance into the kitchen; and he was obliged to confess to himself, to
the shame of the procurator’s wife and his own regret, that he did not
see that fire, that animation, that bustle, which when a good repast is
on foot prevails generally in that sanctuary of good living.

The procurator had without doubt been warned of his visit, as he
expressed no surprise at the sight of Porthos, who advanced toward him
with a sufficiently easy air, and saluted him courteously.

“We are cousins, it appears, Monsieur Porthos?” said the procurator,
rising, yet supporting his weight upon the arms of his cane chair.

The old man, wrapped in a large black doublet, in which the whole of his
slender body was concealed, was brisk and dry. His little gray eyes
shone like carbuncles, and appeared, with his grinning mouth, to be the
only part of his face in which life survived. Unfortunately the legs
began to refuse their service to this bony machine. During the last five
or six months that this weakness had been felt, the worthy procurator
had nearly become the slave of his wife.

The cousin was received with resignation, that was all. M. Coquenard,
firm upon his legs, would have declined all relationship with M.
Porthos.

“Yes, monsieur, we are cousins,” said Porthos, without being
disconcerted, as he had never reckoned upon being received
enthusiastically by the husband.

“By the female side, I believe?” said the procurator, maliciously.

Porthos did not feel the ridicule of this, and took it for a piece of
simplicity, at which he laughed in his large mustache. Mme. Coquenard,
who knew that a simple-minded procurator was a very rare variety in the
species, smiled a little, and colored a great deal.

M Coquenard had, since the arrival of Porthos, frequently cast his eyes
with great uneasiness upon a large chest placed in front of his oak
desk. Porthos comprehended that this chest, although it did not
correspond in shape with that which he had seen in his dreams, must be
the blessed coffer, and he congratulated himself that the reality was
several feet higher than the dream.

M Coquenard did not carry his genealogical investigations any further;
but withdrawing his anxious look from the chest and fixing it upon
Porthos, he contented himself with saying, “Monsieur our cousin will do
us the favor of dining with us once before his departure for the
campaign, will he not, Madame Coquenard?”

This time Porthos received the blow right in his stomach, and felt it.
It appeared likewise that Mme. Coquenard was not less affected by it on
her part, for she added, “My cousin will not return if he finds that we
do not treat him kindly; but otherwise he has so little time to pass in
Paris, and consequently to spare to us, that we must entreat him to give
us every instant he can call his own previous to his departure.”

“Oh, my legs, my poor legs! where are you?” murmured Coquenard, and he
tried to smile.

This succor, which came to Porthos at the moment in which he was
attacked in his gastronomic hopes, inspired much gratitude in the
Musketeer toward the procurator’s wife.

The hour of dinner soon arrived. They passed into the eating room--a
large dark room situated opposite the kitchen.

The clerks, who, as it appeared, had smelled unusual perfumes in the
house, were of military punctuality, and held their stools in hand quite
ready to sit down. Their jaws moved preliminarily with fearful
threatenings.

“Indeed!” thought Porthos, casting a glance at the three hungry
clerks--for the errand boy, as might be expected, was not admitted to
the honors of the magisterial table, “in my cousin’s place, I would not
keep such gourmands! They look like shipwrecked sailors who have not
eaten for six weeks.”

M Coquenard entered, pushed along upon his armchair with casters by Mme.
Coquenard, whom Porthos assisted in rolling her husband up to the table.
He had scarcely entered when he began to agitate his nose and his jaws
after the example of his clerks.

“Oh, oh!” said he; “here is a soup which is rather inviting.”

“What the devil can they smell so extraordinary in this soup?” said
Porthos, at the sight of a pale liquid, abundant but entirely free from
meat, on the surface of which a few crusts swam about as rare as the
islands of an archipelago.

Mme. Coquenard smiled, and upon a sign from her everyone eagerly took
his seat.

M Coquenard was served first, then Porthos. Afterward Mme. Coquenard
filled her own plate, and distributed the crusts without soup to the
impatient clerks. At this moment the door of the dining room unclosed
with a creak, and Porthos perceived through the half-open flap the
little clerk who, not being allowed to take part in the feast, ate his
dry bread in the passage with the double odor of the dining room and
kitchen.

After the soup the maid brought a boiled fowl--a piece of magnificence
which caused the eyes of the diners to dilate in such a manner that they
seemed ready to burst.

“One may see that you love your family, Madame Coquenard,” said the
procurator, with a smile that was almost tragic. “You are certainly
treating your cousin very handsomely!”

The poor fowl was thin, and covered with one of those thick, bristly
skins through which the teeth cannot penetrate with all their efforts.
The fowl must have been sought for a long time on the perch, to which it
had retired to die of old age.

“The devil!” thought Porthos, “this is poor work. I respect old age, but
I don’t much like it boiled or roasted.”

And he looked round to see if anybody partook of his opinion; but on the
contrary, he saw nothing but eager eyes which were devouring, in
anticipation, that sublime fowl which was the object of his contempt.

Mme. Coquenard drew the dish toward her, skillfully detached the two
great black feet, which she placed upon her husband’s plate, cut off the
neck, which with the head she put on one side for herself, raised the
wing for Porthos, and then returned the bird otherwise intact to the
servant who had brought it in, who disappeared with it before the
Musketeer had time to examine the variations which disappointment
produces upon faces, according to the characters and temperaments of
those who experience it.

In the place of the fowl a dish of haricot beans made its appearance--an
enormous dish in which some bones of mutton that at first sight one
might have believed to have some meat on them pretended to show
themselves.

But the clerks were not the dupes of this deceit, and their lugubrious
looks settled down into resigned countenances.

Mme. Coquenard distributed this dish to the young men with the
moderation of a good housewife.

The time for wine came. M. Coquenard poured from a very small stone
bottle the third of a glass for each of the young men, served himself in
about the same proportion, and passed the bottle to Porthos and Mme.
Coquenard.

The young men filled up their third of a glass with water; then, when
they had drunk half the glass, they filled it up again, and continued to
do so. This brought them, by the end of the repast, to swallowing a
drink which from the color of the ruby had passed to that of a pale
topaz.

Porthos ate his wing of the fowl timidly, and shuddered when he felt the
knee of the procurator’s wife under the table, as it came in search of
his. He also drank half a glass of this sparingly served wine, and found
it to be nothing but that horrible Montreuil--the terror of all expert
palates.

M Coquenard saw him swallowing this wine undiluted, and sighed deeply.

“Will you eat any of these beans, Cousin Porthos?” said Mme. Coquenard,
in that tone which says, “Take my advice, don’t touch them.”

“Devil take me if I taste one of them!” murmured Porthos to himself, and
then said aloud, “Thank you, my cousin, I am no longer hungry.”

There was silence. Porthos could hardly keep his countenance.

The procurator repeated several times, “Ah, Madame Coquenard! Accept my
compliments; your dinner has been a real feast. Lord, how I have eaten!”

M Coquenard had eaten his soup, the black feet of the fowl, and the only
mutton bone on which there was the least appearance of meat.

Porthos fancied they were mystifying him, and began to curl his mustache
and knit his eyebrows; but the knee of Mme. Coquenard gently advised him
to be patient.

This silence and this interruption in serving, which were unintelligible
to Porthos, had, on the contrary, a terrible meaning for the clerks.
Upon a look from the procurator, accompanied by a smile from Mme.
Coquenard, they arose slowly from the table, folded their napkins more
slowly still, bowed, and retired.

“Go, young men! go and promote digestion by working,” said the
procurator, gravely.

The clerks gone, Mme. Coquenard rose and took from a buffet a piece of
cheese, some preserved quinces, and a cake which she had herself made of
almonds and honey.

M Coquenard knit his eyebrows because there were too many good things.
Porthos bit his lips because he saw not the wherewithal to dine. He
looked to see if the dish of beans was still there; the dish of beans
had disappeared.

“A positive feast!” cried M. Coquenard, turning about in his chair, “a
real feast, EPULCE EPULORUM. Lucullus dines with Lucullus.”

Porthos looked at the bottle, which was near him, and hoped that with
wine, bread, and cheese, he might make a dinner; but wine was wanting,
the bottle was empty. M. and Mme. Coquenard did not seem to observe it.

“This is fine!” said Porthos to himself; “I am prettily caught!”

He passed his tongue over a spoonful of preserves, and stuck his teeth
into the sticky pastry of Mme. Coquenard.

“Now,” said he, “the sacrifice is consummated! Ah! if I had not the hope
of peeping with Madame Coquenard into her husband’s chest!”

M Coquenard, after the luxuries of such a repast, which he called an
excess, felt the want of a siesta. Porthos began to hope that the thing
would take place at the present sitting, and in that same locality; but
the procurator would listen to nothing, he would be taken to his room,
and was not satisfied till he was close to his chest, upon the edge of
which, for still greater precaution, he placed his feet.

The procurator’s wife took Porthos into an adjoining room, and they
began to lay the basis of a reconciliation.

“You can come and dine three times a week,” said Mme. Coquenard.

“Thanks, madame!” said Porthos, “but I don’t like to abuse your
kindness; besides, I must think of my outfit!”

“That’s true,” said the procurator’s wife, groaning, “that unfortunate
outfit!”

“Alas, yes,” said Porthos, “it is so.”

“But of what, then, does the equipment of your company consist, Monsieur
Porthos?”

“Oh, of many things!” said Porthos. “The Musketeers are, as you know,
picked soldiers, and they require many things useless to the Guardsmen
or the Swiss.”

“But yet, detail them to me.”

“Why, they may amount to--“, said Porthos, who preferred discussing the
total to taking them one by one.

The procurator’s wife waited tremblingly.

“To how much?” said she. “I hope it does not exceed--” She stopped;
speech failed her.

“Oh, no,” said Porthos, “it does not exceed two thousand five hundred
livres! I even think that with economy I could manage it with two
thousand livres.”

“Good God!” cried she, “two thousand livres! Why, that is a fortune!”

Porthos made a most significant grimace; Mme. Coquenard understood it.

“I wished to know the detail,” said she, “because, having many relatives
in business, I was almost sure of obtaining things at a hundred per cent
less than you would pay yourself.”

“Ah, ah!” said Porthos, “that is what you meant to say!”

“Yes, dear Monsieur Porthos. Thus, for instance, don’t you in the first
place want a horse?”

“Yes, a horse.”

“Well, then! I can just suit you.”

“Ah!” said Porthos, brightening, “that’s well as regards my horse; but I
must have the appointments complete, as they include objects which a
Musketeer alone can purchase, and which will not amount, besides, to
more than three hundred livres.”

“Three hundred livres? Then put down three hundred livres,” said the
procurator’s wife, with a sigh.

Porthos smiled. It may be remembered that he had the saddle which came
from Buckingham. These three hundred livres he reckoned upon putting
snugly into his pocket.

“Then,” continued he, “there is a horse for my lackey, and my valise. As
to my arms, it is useless to trouble you about them; I have them.”

“A horse for your lackey?” resumed the procurator’s wife, hesitatingly;
“but that is doing things in lordly style, my friend.”

“Ah, madame!” said Porthos, haughtily; “do you take me for a beggar?”

“No; I only thought that a pretty mule makes sometimes as good an
appearance as a horse, and it seemed to me that by getting a pretty mule
for Mousqueton--”

“Well, agreed for a pretty mule,” said Porthos; “you are right, I have
seen very great Spanish nobles whose whole suite were mounted on mules.
But then you understand, Madame Coquenard, a mule with feathers and
bells.”

“Be satisfied,” said the procurator’s wife.

“There remains the valise,” added Porthos.

“Oh, don’t let that disturb you,” cried Mme. Coquenard. “My husband has
five or six valises; you shall choose the best. There is one in
particular which he prefers in his journeys, large enough to hold all
the world.”

“Your valise is then empty?” asked Porthos, with simplicity.

“Certainly it is empty,” replied the procurator’s wife, in real
innocence.

“Ah, but the valise I want,” cried Porthos, “is a well-filled one, my
dear.”

Madame uttered fresh sighs. Moliere had not written his scene in
“L’Avare” then. Mme. Coquenard was in the dilemma of Harpagan.

Finally, the rest of the equipment was successively debated in the same
manner; and the result of the sitting was that the procurator’s wife
should give eight hundred livres in money, and should furnish the horse
and the mule which should have the honor of carrying Porthos and
Mousqueton to glory.

These conditions being agreed to, Porthos took leave of Mme. Coquenard.
The latter wished to detain him by darting certain tender glances; but
Porthos urged the commands of duty, and the procurator’s wife was
obliged to give place to the king.

The Musketeer returned home hungry and in bad humor.




33 SOUBRETTE AND MISTRESS


Meantime, as we have said, despite the cries of his conscience and the
wise counsels of Athos, d’Artagnan became hourly more in love with
Milady. Thus he never failed to pay his diurnal court to her; and the
self-satisfied Gascon was convinced that sooner or later she could not
fail to respond.

One day, when he arrived with his head in the air, and as light at heart
as a man who awaits a shower of gold, he found the SOUBRETTE under the
gateway of the hotel; but this time the pretty Kitty was not contented
with touching him as he passed, she took him gently by the hand.

“Good!” thought d’Artagnan, “She is charged with some message for me
from her mistress; she is about to appoint some rendezvous of which she
had not courage to speak.” And he looked down at the pretty girl with
the most triumphant air imaginable.

“I wish to say three words to you, Monsieur Chevalier,” stammered the
SOUBRETTE.

“Speak, my child, speak,” said d’Artagnan; “I listen.”

“Here? Impossible! That which I have to say is too long, and above all,
too secret.”

“Well, what is to be done?”

“If Monsieur Chevalier would follow me?” said Kitty, timidly.

“Where you please, my dear child.”

“Come, then.”

And Kitty, who had not let go the hand of d’Artagnan, led him up a
little dark, winding staircase, and after ascending about fifteen steps,
opened a door.

“Come in here, Monsieur Chevalier,” said she; “here we shall be alone,
and can talk.”

“And whose room is this, my dear child?”

“It is mine, Monsieur Chevalier; it communicates with my mistress’s by
that door. But you need not fear. She will not hear what we say; she
never goes to bed before midnight.”

D’Artagnan cast a glance around him. The little apartment was charming
for its taste and neatness; but in spite of himself, his eyes were
directed to that door which Kitty said led to Milady’s chamber.

Kitty guessed what was passing in the mind of the young man, and heaved
a deep sigh.

“You love my mistress, then, very dearly, Monsieur Chevalier?” said she.

“Oh, more than I can say, Kitty! I am mad for her!”

Kitty breathed a second sigh.

“Alas, monsieur,” said she, “that is too bad.”

“What the devil do you see so bad in it?” said d’Artagnan.

“Because, monsieur,” replied Kitty, “my mistress loves you not at all.”

“HEIN!” said d’Artagnan, “can she have charged you to tell me so?”

“Oh, no, monsieur; but out of the regard I have for you, I have taken
the resolution to tell you so.”

“Much obliged, my dear Kitty; but for the intention only--for the
information, you must agree, is not likely to be at all agreeable.”

“That is to say, you don’t believe what I have told you; is it not so?”

“We have always some difficulty in believing such things, my pretty
dear, were it only from self-love.”

“Then you don’t believe me?”

“I confess that unless you deign to give me some proof of what you
advance--”

“What do you think of this?”

Kitty drew a little note from her bosom.

“For me?” said d’Artagnan, seizing the letter.

“No; for another.”

“For another?”

“Yes.”

“His name; his name!” cried d’Artagnan.

“Read the address.”

“Monsieur El Comte de Wardes.”

The remembrance of the scene at St. Germain presented itself to the mind
of the presumptuous Gascon. As quick as thought, he tore open the
letter, in spite of the cry which Kitty uttered on seeing what he was
going to do, or rather, what he was doing.

“Oh, good Lord, Monsieur Chevalier,” said she, “what are you doing?”

“I?” said d’Artagnan; “nothing,” and he read,

“You have not answered my first note. Are you indisposed, or have you
forgotten the glances you favored me with at the ball of Mme. de Guise?
You have an opportunity now, Count; do not allow it to escape.”

d’Artagnan became very pale; he was wounded in his SELF-love: he thought
that it was in his LOVE.

“Poor dear Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Kitty, in a voice full of
compassion, and pressing anew the young man’s hand.

“You pity me, little one?” said d’Artagnan.

“Oh, yes, and with all my heart; for I know what it is to be in love.”

“You know what it is to be in love?” said d’Artagnan, looking at her for
the first time with much attention.

“Alas, yes.”

“Well, then, instead of pitying me, you would do much better to assist
me in avenging myself on your mistress.”

“And what sort of revenge would you take?”

“I would triumph over her, and supplant my rival.”

“I will never help you in that, Monsieur Chevalier,” said Kitty, warmly.

“And why not?” demanded d’Artagnan.

“For two reasons.”

“What ones?”

“The first is that my mistress will never love you.”

“How do you know that?”

“You have cut her to the heart.”

“I? In what can I have offended her--I who ever since I have known her
have lived at her feet like a slave? Speak, I beg you!”

“I will never confess that but to the man--who should read to the bottom
of my soul!”

D’Artagnan looked at Kitty for the second time. The young girl had
freshness and beauty which many duchesses would have purchased with
their coronets.

“Kitty,” said he, “I will read to the bottom of your soul when-ever you
like; don’t let that disturb you.” And he gave her a kiss at which the
poor girl became as red as a cherry.

“Oh, no,” said Kitty, “it is not me you love! It is my mistress you
love; you told me so just now.”

“And does that hinder you from letting me know the second reason?”

“The second reason, Monsieur the Chevalier,” replied Kitty, emboldened
by the kiss in the first place, and still further by the expression of
the eyes of the young man, “is that in love, everyone for herself!”

Then only d’Artagnan remembered the languishing glances of Kitty, her
constantly meeting him in the antechamber, the corridor, or on the
stairs, those touches of the hand every time she met him, and her deep
sighs; but absorbed by his desire to please the great lady, he had
disdained the soubrette. He whose game is the eagle takes no heed of the
sparrow.

But this time our Gascon saw at a glance all the advantage to be derived
from the love which Kitty had just confessed so innocently, or so
boldly: the interception of letters addressed to the Comte de Wardes,
news on the spot, entrance at all hours into Kitty’s chamber, which was
contiguous to her mistress’s. The perfidious deceiver was, as may
plainly be perceived, already sacrificing, in intention, the poor girl
in order to obtain Milady, willy-nilly.

“Well,” said he to the young girl, “are you willing, my dear Kitty, that
I should give you a proof of that love which you doubt?”

“What love?” asked the young girl.

“Of that which I am ready to feel toward you.”

“And what is that proof?”

“Are you willing that I should this evening pass with you the time I
generally spend with your mistress?”

“Oh, yes,” said Kitty, clapping her hands, “very willing.”

“Well, then, come here, my dear,” said d’Artagnan, establishing himself
in an easy chair; “come, and let me tell you that you are the prettiest
SOUBRETTE I ever saw!”

And he did tell her so much, and so well, that the poor girl, who asked
nothing better than to believe him, did believe him. Nevertheless, to
d’Artagnan’s great astonishment, the pretty Kitty defended herself
resolutely.

Time passes quickly when it is passed in attacks and defenses. Midnight
sounded, and almost at the same time the bell was rung in Milady’s
chamber.

“Good God,” cried Kitty, “there is my mistress calling me! Go; go
directly!”

D’Artagnan rose, took his hat, as if it had been his intention to obey,
then, opening quickly the door of a large closet instead of that leading
to the staircase, he buried himself amid the robes and dressing gowns of
Milady.

“What are you doing?” cried Kitty.

D’Artagnan, who had secured the key, shut himself up in the closet
without reply.

“Well,” cried Milady, in a sharp voice. “Are you asleep, that you don’t
answer when I ring?”

And d’Artagnan heard the door of communication opened violently.

“Here am I, Milady, here am I!” cried Kitty, springing forward to meet
her mistress.

Both went into the bedroom, and as the door of communication remained
open, d’Artagnan could hear Milady for some time scolding her maid. She
was at length appeased, and the conversation turned upon him while Kitty
was assisting her mistress.

“Well,” said Milady, “I have not seen our Gascon this evening.”

“What, Milady! has he not come?” said Kitty. “Can he be inconstant
before being happy?”

“Oh, no; he must have been prevented by Monsieur de Treville or Monsieur
Dessessart. I understand my game, Kitty; I have this one safe.”

“What will you do with him, madame?”

“What will I do with him? Be easy, Kitty, there is something between
that man and me that he is quite ignorant of: he nearly made me lose my
credit with his Eminence. Oh, I will be revenged!”

“I believed that Madame loved him.”

“I love him? I detest him! An idiot, who held the life of Lord de Winter
in his hands and did not kill him, by which I missed three hundred
thousand livres’ income.”

“That’s true,” said Kitty; “your son was the only heir of his uncle, and
until his majority you would have had the enjoyment of his fortune.”

D’Artagnan shuddered to the marrow at hearing this suave creature
reproach him, with that sharp voice which she took such pains to conceal
in conversation, for not having killed a man whom he had seen load her
with kindnesses.

“For all this,” continued Milady, “I should long ago have revenged
myself on him if, and I don’t know why, the cardinal had not requested
me to conciliate him.”

“Oh, yes; but Madame has not conciliated that little woman he was so
fond of.”

“What, the mercer’s wife of the Rue des Fossoyeurs? Has he not already
forgotten she ever existed? Fine vengeance that, on my faith!”

A cold sweat broke from d’Artagnan’s brow. Why, this woman was a
monster! He resumed his listening, but unfortunately the toilet was
finished.

“That will do,” said Milady; “go into your own room, and tomorrow
endeavor again to get me an answer to the letter I gave you.”

“For Monsieur de Wardes?” said Kitty.

“To be sure; for Monsieur de Wardes.”

“Now, there is one,” said Kitty, “who appears to me quite a different
sort of a man from that poor Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“Go to bed, mademoiselle,” said Milady; “I don’t like comments.”

D’Artagnan heard the door close; then the noise of two bolts by which
Milady fastened herself in. On her side, but as softly as possible,
Kitty turned the key of the lock, and then d’Artagnan opened the closet
door.

“Oh, good Lord!” said Kitty, in a low voice, “what is the matter with
you? How pale you are!”

“The abominable creature,” murmured d’Artagnan.

“Silence, silence, begone!” said Kitty. “There is nothing but a wainscot
between my chamber and Milady’s; every word that is uttered in one can
be heard in the other.”

“That’s exactly the reason I won’t go,” said d’Artagnan.

“What!” said Kitty, blushing.

“Or, at least, I will go--later.”

He drew Kitty to him. She had the less motive to resist, resistance
would make so much noise. Therefore Kitty surrendered.

It was a movement of vengeance upon Milady. D’Artagnan believed it right
to say that vengeance is the pleasure of the gods. With a little more
heart, he might have been contented with this new conquest; but the
principal features of his character were ambition and pride. It must,
however, be confessed in his justification that the first use he made of
his influence over Kitty was to try and find out what had become of Mme.
Bonacieux; but the poor girl swore upon the crucifix to d’Artagnan that
she was entirely ignorant on that head, her mistress never admitting her
into half her secrets--only she believed she could say she was not dead.

As to the cause which was near making Milady lose her credit with the
cardinal, Kitty knew nothing about it; but this time d’Artagnan was
better informed than she was. As he had seen Milady on board a vessel at
the moment he was leaving England, he suspected that it was, almost
without a doubt, on account of the diamond studs.

But what was clearest in all this was that the true hatred, the profound
hatred, the inveterate hatred of Milady, was increased by his not having
killed her brother-in-law.

D’Artagnan came the next day to Milady’s, and finding her in a very
ill-humor, had no doubt that it was lack of an answer from M. de Wardes
that provoked her thus. Kitty came in, but Milady was very cross with
her. The poor girl ventured a glance at d’Artagnan which said, “See how
I suffer on your account!”

Toward the end of the evening, however, the beautiful lioness became
milder; she smilingly listened to the soft speeches of d’Artagnan, and
even gave him her hand to kiss.

D’Artagnan departed, scarcely knowing what to think, but as he was a
youth who did not easily lose his head, while continuing to pay his
court to Milady, he had framed a little plan in his mind.

He found Kitty at the gate, and, as on the preceding evening, went up to
her chamber. Kitty had been accused of negligence and severely scolded.
Milady could not at all comprehend the silence of the Comte de Wardes,
and she ordered Kitty to come at nine o’clock in the morning to take a
third letter.

D’Artagnan made Kitty promise to bring him that letter on the following
morning. The poor girl promised all her lover desired; she was mad.

Things passed as on the night before. D’Artagnan concealed himself in
his closet; Milady called, undressed, sent away Kitty, and shut the
door. As the night before, d’Artagnan did not return home till five
o’clock in the morning.

At eleven o’clock Kitty came to him. She held in her hand a fresh billet
from Milady. This time the poor girl did not even argue with d’Artagnan;
she gave it to him at once. She belonged body and soul to her handsome
soldier.

D’Artagnan opened the letter and read as follows:

This is the third time I have written to you to tell you that I love
you. Beware that I do not write to you a fourth time to tell you that I
detest you.

If you repent of the manner in which you have acted toward me, the young
girl who brings you this will tell you how a man of spirit may obtain
his pardon.

d’Artagnan colored and grew pale several times in reading this billet.

“Oh, you love her still,” said Kitty, who had not taken her eyes off the
young man’s countenance for an instant.

“No, Kitty, you are mistaken. I do not love her, but I will avenge
myself for her contempt.”

“Oh, yes, I know what sort of vengeance! You told me that!”

“What matters it to you, Kitty? You know it is you alone whom I love.”

“How can I know that?”

“By the scorn I will throw upon her.”

D’Artagnan took a pen and wrote:

Madame, Until the present moment I could not believe that it was to me
your first two letters were addressed, so unworthy did I feel myself of
such an honor; besides, I was so seriously indisposed that I could not
in any case have replied to them.

But now I am forced to believe in the excess of your kindness, since not
only your letter but your servant assures me that I have the good
fortune to be beloved by you.

She has no occasion to teach me the way in which a man of spirit may
obtain his pardon. I will come and ask mine at eleven o’clock this
evening.

To delay it a single day would be in my eyes now to commit a fresh
offense.

From him whom you have rendered the happiest of men, Comte de Wardes

This note was in the first place a forgery; it was likewise an
indelicacy. It was even, according to our present manners, something
like an infamous action; but at that period people did not manage
affairs as they do today. Besides, d’Artagnan from her own admission
knew Milady culpable of treachery in matters more important, and could
entertain no respect for her. And yet, notwithstanding this want of
respect, he felt an uncontrollable passion for this woman boiling in his
veins--passion drunk with contempt; but passion or thirst, as the reader
pleases.

D’Artagnan’s plan was very simple. By Kitty’s chamber he could gain that
of her mistress. He would take advantage of the first moment of
surprise, shame, and terror, to triumph over her. He might fail, but
something must be left to chance. In eight days the campaign would open,
and he would be compelled to leave Paris; d’Artagnan had no time for a
prolonged love siege.

“There,” said the young man, handing Kitty the letter sealed; “give that
to Milady. It is the count’s reply.”

Poor Kitty became as pale as death; she suspected what the letter
contained.

“Listen, my dear girl,” said d’Artagnan; “you cannot but perceive that
all this must end, some way or other. Milady may discover that you gave
the first billet to my lackey instead of to the count’s; that it is I
who have opened the others which ought to have been opened by de Wardes.
Milady will then turn you out of doors, and you know she is not the
woman to limit her vengeance.”

“Alas!” said Kitty, “for whom have I exposed myself to all that?”

“For me, I well know, my sweet girl,” said d’Artagnan. “But I am
grateful, I swear to you.”

“But what does this note contain?”

“Milady will tell you.”

“Ah, you do not love me!” cried Kitty, “and I am very wretched.”

To this reproach there is always one response which deludes women.
D’Artagnan replied in such a manner that Kitty remained in her great
delusion. Although she cried freely before deciding to transmit the
letter to her mistress, she did at last so decide, which was all
d’Artagnan wished. Finally he promised that he would leave her
mistress’s presence at an early hour that evening, and that when he left
the mistress he would ascend with the maid. This promise completed poor
Kitty’s consolation.




34 IN WHICH THE EQUIPMENT OF ARAMIS AND PORTHOS IS TREATED OF


Since the four friends had been each in search of his equipments, there
had been no fixed meeting between them. They dined apart from one
another, wherever they might happen to be, or rather where they could.
Duty likewise on its part took a portion of that precious time which was
gliding away so rapidly--only they had agreed to meet once a week, about
one o’clock, at the residence of Athos, seeing that he, in agreement
with the vow he had formed, did not pass over the threshold of his door.

This day of reunion was the same day as that on which Kitty came to find
d’Artagnan. Soon as Kitty left him, d’Artagnan directed his steps toward
the Rue Ferou.

He found Athos and Aramis philosophizing. Aramis had some slight
inclination to resume the cassock. Athos, according to his system,
neither encouraged nor dissuaded him. Athos believed that everyone
should be left to his own free will. He never gave advice but when it
was asked, and even then he required to be asked twice.

“People, in general,” he said, “only ask advice not to follow it; or if
they do follow it, it is for the sake of having someone to blame for
having given it.”

Porthos arrived a minute after d’Artagnan. The four friends were
reunited.

The four countenances expressed four different feelings: that of
Porthos, tranquillity; that of d’Artagnan, hope; that of Aramis,
uneasiness; that of Athos, carelessness.

At the end of a moment’s conversation, in which Porthos hinted that a
lady of elevated rank had condescended to relieve him from his
embarrassment, Mousqueton entered. He came to request his master to
return to his lodgings, where his presence was urgent, as he piteously
said.

“Is it my equipment?”

“Yes and no,” replied Mousqueton.

“Well, but can’t you speak?”

“Come, monsieur.”

Porthos rose, saluted his friends, and followed Mousqueton. An instant
after, Bazin made his appearance at the door.

“What do you want with me, my friend?” said Aramis, with that mildness
of language which was observable in him every time that his ideas were
directed toward the Church.

“A man wishes to see Monsieur at home,” replied Bazin.

“A man! What man?”

“A mendicant.”

“Give him alms, Bazin, and bid him pray for a poor sinner.”

“This mendicant insists upon speaking to you, and pretends that you will
be very glad to see him.”

“Has he sent no particular message for me?”

“Yes. If Monsieur Aramis hesitates to come,” he said, “tell him I am
from Tours.”

“From Tours!” cried Aramis. “A thousand pardons, gentlemen; but no doubt
this man brings me the news I expected.” And rising also, he went off at
a quick pace. There remained Athos and d’Artagnan.

“I believe these fellows have managed their business. What do you think,
d’Artagnan?” said Athos.

“I know that Porthos was in a fair way,” replied d’Artagnan; “and as to
Aramis to tell you the truth, I have never been seriously uneasy on his
account. But you, my dear Athos--you, who so generously distributed the
Englishman’s pistoles, which were our legitimate property--what do you
mean to do?”

“I am satisfied with having killed that fellow, my boy, seeing that it
is blessed bread to kill an Englishman; but if I had pocketed his
pistoles, they would have weighed me down like a remorse.”

“Go to, my dear Athos; you have truly inconceivable ideas.”

“Let it pass. What do you think of Monsieur de Treville telling me, when
he did me the honor to call upon me yesterday, that you associated with
the suspected English, whom the cardinal protects?”

“That is to say, I visit an Englishwoman--the one I named.”

“Oh, ay! the fair woman on whose account I gave you advice, which
naturally you took care not to adopt.”

“I gave you my reasons.”

“Yes; you look there for your outfit, I think you said.”

“Not at all. I have acquired certain knowledge that that woman was
concerned in the abduction of Madame Bonacieux.”

“Yes, I understand now: to find one woman, you court another. It is the
longest road, but certainly the most amusing.”

D’Artagnan was on the point of telling Athos all; but one consideration
restrained him. Athos was a gentleman, punctilious in points of honor;
and there were in the plan which our lover had devised for Milady, he
was sure, certain things that would not obtain the assent of this
Puritan. He was therefore silent; and as Athos was the least inquisitive
of any man on earth, d’Artagnan’s confidence stopped there. We will
therefore leave the two friends, who had nothing important to say to
each other, and follow Aramis.

Upon being informed that the person who wanted to speak to him came from
Tours, we have seen with what rapidity the young man followed, or rather
went before, Bazin; he ran without stopping from the Rue Ferou to the
Rue de Vaugirard. On entering he found a man of short stature and
intelligent eyes, but covered with rags.

“You have asked for me?” said the Musketeer.

“I wish to speak with Monsieur Aramis. Is that your name, monsieur?”

“My very own. You have brought me something?”

“Yes, if you show me a certain embroidered handkerchief.”

“Here it is,” said Aramis, taking a small key from his breast and
opening a little ebony box inlaid with mother of pearl, “here it is.
Look.”

“That is right,” replied the mendicant; “dismiss your lackey.”

In fact, Bazin, curious to know what the mendicant could want with his
master, kept pace with him as well as he could, and arrived almost at
the same time he did; but his quickness was not of much use to him. At
the hint from the mendicant his master made him a sign to retire, and he
was obliged to obey.

Bazin gone, the mendicant cast a rapid glance around him in order to be
sure that nobody could either see or hear him, and opening his ragged
vest, badly held together by a leather strap, he began to rip the upper
part of his doublet, from which he drew a letter.

Aramis uttered a cry of joy at the sight of the seal, kissed the
superscription with an almost religious respect, and opened the epistle,
which contained what follows:

“My Friend, it is the will of fate that we should be still for some time
separated; but the delightful days of youth are not lost beyond return.
Perform your duty in camp; I will do mine elsewhere. Accept that which
the bearer brings you; make the campaign like a handsome true gentleman,
and think of me, who kisses tenderly your black eyes.

“Adieu; or rather, AU REVOIR.”

The mendicant continued to rip his garments; and drew from amid his rags
a hundred and fifty Spanish double pistoles, which he laid down on the
table; then he opened the door, bowed, and went out before the young
man, stupefied by his letter, had ventured to address a word to him.

Aramis then reperused the letter, and perceived a postscript:

PS. You may behave politely to the bearer, who is a count and a grandee
of Spain!

“Golden dreams!” cried Aramis. “Oh, beautiful life! Yes, we are young;
yes, we shall yet have happy days! My love, my blood, my life! all, all,
all, are thine, my adored mistress!”

And he kissed the letter with passion, without even vouchsafing a look
at the gold which sparkled on the table.

Bazin scratched at the door, and as Aramis had no longer any reason to
exclude him, he bade him come in.

Bazin was stupefied at the sight of the gold, and forgot that he came to
announce d’Artagnan, who, curious to know who the mendicant could be,
came to Aramis on leaving Athos.

Now, as d’Artagnan used no ceremony with Aramis, seeing that Bazin
forgot to announce him, he announced himself.

“The devil! my dear Aramis,” said d’Artagnan, “if these are the prunes
that are sent to you from Tours, I beg you will make my compliments to
the gardener who gathers them.”

“You are mistaken, friend d’Artagnan,” said Aramis, always on his guard;
“this is from my publisher, who has just sent me the price of that poem
in one-syllable verse which I began yonder.”

“Ah, indeed,” said d’Artagnan. “Well, your publisher is very generous,
my dear Aramis, that’s all I can say.”

“How, monsieur?” cried Bazin, “a poem sell so dear as that! It is
incredible! Oh, monsieur, you can write as much as you like; you may
become equal to Monsieur de Voiture and Monsieur de Benserade. I like
that. A poet is as good as an abbe. Ah! Monsieur Aramis, become a poet,
I beg of you.”

“Bazin, my friend,” said Aramis, “I believe you meddle with my
conversation.”

Bazin perceived he was wrong; he bowed and went out.

“Ah!” said d’Artagnan with a smile, “you sell your productions at their
weight in gold. You are very fortunate, my friend; but take care or you
will lose that letter which is peeping from your doublet, and which also
comes, no doubt, from your publisher.”

Aramis blushed to the eyes, crammed in the letter, and re-buttoned his
doublet.

“My dear d’Artagnan,” said he, “if you please, we will join our friends;
as I am rich, we will today begin to dine together again, expecting that
you will be rich in your turn.”

“My faith!” said d’Artagnan, with great pleasure. “It is long since we
have had a good dinner; and I, for my part, have a somewhat hazardous
expedition for this evening, and shall not be sorry, I confess, to
fortify myself with a few glasses of good old Burgundy.”

“Agreed, as to the old Burgundy; I have no objection to that,” said
Aramis, from whom the letter and the gold had removed, as by magic, his
ideas of conversion.

And having put three or four double pistoles into his pocket to answer
the needs of the moment, he placed the others in the ebony box, inlaid
with mother of pearl, in which was the famous handkerchief which served
him as a talisman.

The two friends repaired to Athos’s, and he, faithful to his vow of not
going out, took upon him to order dinner to be brought to them. As he
was perfectly acquainted with the details of gastronomy, d’Artagnan and
Aramis made no objection to abandoning this important care to him.

They went to find Porthos, and at the corner of the Rue Bac met
Mousqueton, who, with a most pitiable air, was driving before him a mule
and a horse.

D’Artagnan uttered a cry of surprise, which was not quite free from joy.

“Ah, my yellow horse,” cried he. “Aramis, look at that horse!”

“Oh, the frightful brute!” said Aramis.

“Ah, my dear,” replied d’Artagnan, “upon that very horse I came to
Paris.”

“What, does Monsieur know this horse?” said Mousqueton.

“It is of an original color,” said Aramis; “I never saw one with such a
hide in my life.”

“I can well believe it,” replied d’Artagnan, “and that was why I got
three crowns for him. It must have been for his hide, for, CERTES, the
carcass is not worth eighteen livres. But how did this horse come into
your hands, Mousqueton?”

“Pray,” said the lackey, “say nothing about it, monsieur; it is a
frightful trick of the husband of our duchess!”

“How is that, Mousqueton?”

“Why, we are looked upon with a rather favorable eye by a lady of
quality, the Duchesse de--but, your pardon; my master has commanded me
to be discreet. She had forced us to accept a little souvenir, a
magnificent Spanish GENET and an Andalusian mule, which were beautiful
to look upon. The husband heard of the affair; on their way he
confiscated the two magnificent beasts which were being sent to us, and
substituted these horrible animals.”

“Which you are taking back to him?” said d’Artagnan.

“Exactly!” replied Mousqueton. “You may well believe that we will not
accept such steeds as these in exchange for those which had been
promised to us.”

“No, PARDIEU; though I should like to have seen Porthos on my yellow
horse. That would give me an idea of how I looked when I arrived in
Paris. But don’t let us hinder you, Mousqueton; go and perform your
master’s orders. Is he at home?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said Mousqueton, “but in a very ill humor. Get up!”

He continued his way toward the Quai des Grands Augustins, while the two
friends went to ring at the bell of the unfortunate Porthos. He, having
seen them crossing the yard, took care not to answer, and they rang in
vain.

Meanwhile Mousqueton continued on his way, and crossing the Pont Neuf,
still driving the two sorry animals before him, he reached the Rue aux
Ours. Arrived there, he fastened, according to the orders of his master,
both horse and mule to the knocker of the procurator’s door; then,
without taking any thought for their future, he returned to Porthos, and
told him that his commission was completed.

In a short time the two unfortunate beasts, who had not eaten anything
since the morning, made such a noise in raising and letting fall the
knocker that the procurator ordered his errand boy to go and inquire in
the neighborhood to whom this horse and mule belonged.

Mme. Coquenard recognized her present, and could not at first comprehend
this restitution; but the visit of Porthos soon enlightened her. The
anger which fired the eyes of the Musketeer, in spite of his efforts to
suppress it, terrified his sensitive inamorata. In fact, Mousqueton had
not concealed from his master that he had met d’Artagnan and Aramis, and
that d’Artagnan in the yellow horse had recognized the Bearnese pony
upon which he had come to Paris, and which he had sold for three crowns.

Porthos went away after having appointed a meeting with the procurator’s
wife in the cloister of St. Magloire. The procurator, seeing he was
going, invited him to dinner--an invitation which the Musketeer refused
with a majestic air.

Mme. Coquenard repaired trembling to the cloister of St. Magloire, for
she guessed the reproaches that awaited her there; but she was
fascinated by the lofty airs of Porthos.

All that which a man wounded in his self-love could let fall in the
shape of imprecations and reproaches upon the head of a woman Porthos
let fall upon the bowed head of the procurator’s wife.

“Alas,” said she, “I did all for the best! One of our clients is a
horsedealer; he owes money to the office, and is backward in his pay. I
took the mule and the horse for what he owed us; he assured me that they
were two noble steeds.”

“Well, madame,” said Porthos, “if he owed you more than five crowns,
your horsedealer is a thief.”

“There is no harm in trying to buy things cheap, Monsieur Porthos,” said
the procurator’s wife, seeking to excuse herself.

“No, madame; but they who so assiduously try to buy things cheap ought
to permit others to seek more generous friends.” And Porthos, turning on
his heel, made a step to retire.

“Monsieur Porthos! Monsieur Porthos!” cried the procurator’s wife. “I
have been wrong; I see it. I ought not to have driven a bargain when it
was to equip a cavalier like you.”

Porthos, without reply, retreated a second step. The procurator’s wife
fancied she saw him in a brilliant cloud, all surrounded by duchesses
and marchionesses, who cast bags of money at his feet.

“Stop, in the name of heaven, Monsieur Porthos!” cried she. “Stop, and
let us talk.”

“Talking with you brings me misfortune,” said Porthos.

“But, tell me, what do you ask?”

“Nothing; for that amounts to the same thing as if I asked you for
something.”

The procurator’s wife hung upon the arm of Porthos, and in the violence
of her grief she cried out, “Monsieur Porthos, I am ignorant of all such
matters! How should I know what a horse is? How should I know what horse
furniture is?”

“You should have left it to me, then, madame, who know what they are;
but you wished to be frugal, and consequently to lend at usury.”

“It was wrong, Monsieur Porthos; but I will repair that wrong, upon my
word of honor.”

“How so?” asked the Musketeer.

“Listen. This evening M. Coquenard is going to the house of the Due de
Chaulnes, who has sent for him. It is for a consultation, which will
last three hours at least. Come! We shall be alone, and can make up our
accounts.”

“In good time. Now you talk, my dear.”

“You pardon me?”

“We shall see,” said Porthos, majestically; and the two separated
saying, “Till this evening.”

“The devil!” thought Porthos, as he walked away, “it appears I am
getting nearer to Monsieur Coquenard’s strongbox at last.”




35 A GASCON A MATCH FOR CUPID


The evening so impatiently waited for by Porthos and by d’Artagnan at
last arrived.

As was his custom, d’Artagnan presented himself at Milady’s at about
nine o’clock. He found her in a charming humor. Never had he been so
well received. Our Gascon knew, by the first glance of his eye, that his
billet had been delivered, and that this billet had had its effect.

Kitty entered to bring some sherbet. Her mistress put on a charming
face, and smiled on her graciously; but alas! the poor girl was so sad
that she did not even notice Milady’s condescension.

D’Artagnan looked at the two women, one after the other, and was forced
to acknowledge that in his opinion Dame Nature had made a mistake in
their formation. To the great lady she had given a heart vile and venal;
to the SOUBRETTE she had given the heart of a duchess.

At ten o’clock Milady began to appear restless. D’Artagnan knew what she
wanted. She looked at the clock, rose, reseated herself, smiled at
d’Artagnan with an air which said, “You are very amiable, no doubt, but
you would be charming if you would only depart.”

D’Artagnan rose and took his hat; Milady gave him her hand to kiss. The
young man felt her press his hand, and comprehended that this was a
sentiment, not of coquetry, but of gratitude because of his departure.

“She loves him devilishly,” he murmured. Then he went out.

This time Kitty was nowhere waiting for him; neither in the antechamber,
nor in the corridor, nor beneath the great door. It was necessary that
d’Artagnan should find alone the staircase and the little chamber. She
heard him enter, but she did not raise her head. The young man went to
her and took her hands; then she sobbed aloud.

As d’Artagnan had presumed, on receiving his letter, Milady in a
delirium of joy had told her servant everything; and by way of
recompense for the manner in which she had this time executed the
commission, she had given Kitty a purse.

Returning to her own room, Kitty had thrown the purse into a corner,
where it lay open, disgorging three or four gold pieces on the carpet.
The poor girl, under the caresses of d’Artagnan, lifted her head.
D’Artagnan himself was frightened by the change in her countenance. She
joined her hands with a suppliant air, but without venturing to speak a
word. As little sensitive as was the heart of d’Artagnan, he was touched
by this mute sorrow; but he held too tenaciously to his projects, above
all to this one, to change the program which he had laid out in advance.
He did not therefore allow her any hope that he would flinch; only he
represented his action as one of simple vengeance.

For the rest this vengeance was very easy; for Milady, doubtless to
conceal her blushes from her lover, had ordered Kitty to extinguish all
the lights in the apartment, and even in the little chamber itself.
Before daybreak M. de Wardes must take his departure, still in
obscurity.

Presently they heard Milady retire to her room. D’Artagnan slipped into
the wardrobe. Hardly was he concealed when the little bell sounded.
Kitty went to her mistress, and did not leave the door open; but the
partition was so thin that one could hear nearly all that passed between
the two women.

Milady seemed overcome with joy, and made Kitty repeat the smallest
details of the pretended interview of the soubrette with de Wardes when
he received the letter; how he had responded; what was the expression of
his face; if he seemed very amorous. And to all these questions poor
Kitty, forced to put on a pleasant face, responded in a stifled voice
whose dolorous accent her mistress did not however remark, solely
because happiness is egotistical.

Finally, as the hour for her interview with the count approached, Milady
had everything about her darkened, and ordered Kitty to return to her
own chamber, and introduce de Wardes whenever he presented himself.

Kitty’s detention was not long. Hardly had d’Artagnan seen, through a
crevice in his closet, that the whole apartment was in obscurity, than
he slipped out of his concealment, at the very moment when Kitty
reclosed the door of communication.

“What is that noise?” demanded Milady.

“It is I,” said d’Artagnan in a subdued voice, “I, the Comte de Wardes.”

“Oh, my God, my God!” murmured Kitty, “he has not even waited for the
hour he himself named!”

“Well,” said Milady, in a trembling voice, “why do you not enter? Count,
Count,” added she, “you know that I wait for you.”

At this appeal d’Artagnan drew Kitty quietly away, and slipped into the
chamber.

If rage or sorrow ever torture the heart, it is when a lover receives
under a name which is not his own protestations of love addressed to his
happy rival. D’Artagnan was in a dolorous situation which he had not
foreseen. Jealousy gnawed his heart; and he suffered almost as much as
poor Kitty, who at that very moment was crying in the next chamber.

“Yes, Count,” said Milady, in her softest voice, and pressing his hand
in her own, “I am happy in the love which your looks and your words have
expressed to me every time we have met. I also--I love you. Oh,
tomorrow, tomorrow, I must have some pledge from you which will prove
that you think of me; and that you may not forget me, take this!” and
she slipped a ring from her finger onto d’Artagnan’s. D’Artagnan
remembered having seen this ring on the finger of Milady; it was a
magnificent sapphire, encircled with brilliants.

The first movement of d’Artagnan was to return it, but Milady added,
“No, no! Keep that ring for love of me. Besides, in accepting it,” she
added, in a voice full of emotion, “you render me a much greater service
than you imagine.”

“This woman is full of mysteries,” murmured d’Artagnan to himself. At
that instant he felt himself ready to reveal all. He even opened his
mouth to tell Milady who he was, and with what a revengeful purpose he
had come; but she added, “Poor angel, whom that monster of a Gascon
barely failed to kill.”

The monster was himself.

“Oh,” continued Milady, “do your wounds still make you suffer?”

“Yes, much,” said d’Artagnan, who did not well know how to answer.

“Be tranquil,” murmured Milady; “I will avenge you--and cruelly!”

“PESTE!” said d’Artagnan to himself, “the moment for confidences has not
yet come.”

It took some time for d’Artagnan to resume this little dialogue; but
then all the ideas of vengeance which he had brought with him had
completely vanished. This woman exercised over him an unaccountable
power; he hated and adored her at the same time. He would not have
believed that two sentiments so opposite could dwell in the same heart,
and by their union constitute a passion so strange, and as it were,
diabolical.

Presently it sounded one o’clock. It was necessary to separate.
D’Artagnan at the moment of quitting Milady felt only the liveliest
regret at the parting; and as they addressed each other in a
reciprocally passionate adieu, another interview was arranged for the
following week.

Poor Kitty hoped to speak a few words to d’Artagnan when he passed
through her chamber; but Milady herself reconducted him through the
darkness, and only quit him at the staircase.

The next morning d’Artagnan ran to find Athos. He was engaged in an
adventure so singular that he wished for counsel. He therefore told him
all.

“Your Milady,” said he, “appears to be an infamous creature, but not the
less you have done wrong to deceive her. In one fashion or another you
have a terrible enemy on your hands.”

While thus speaking Athos regarded with attention the sapphire set with
diamonds which had taken, on d’Artagnan’s finger, the place of the
queen’s ring, carefully kept in a casket.

“You notice my ring?” said the Gascon, proud to display so rich a gift
in the eyes of his friends.

“Yes,” said Athos, “it reminds me of a family jewel.”

“It is beautiful, is it not?” said d’Artagnan.

“Yes,” said Athos, “magnificent. I did not think two sapphires of such a
fine water existed. Have you traded it for your diamond?”

“No. It is a gift from my beautiful Englishwoman, or rather
Frenchwoman--for I am convinced she was born in France, though I have
not questioned her.”

“That ring comes from Milady?” cried Athos, with a voice in which it was
easy to detect strong emotion.

“Her very self; she gave it me last night. Here it is,” replied
d’Artagnan, taking it from his finger.

Athos examined it and became very pale. He tried it on his left hand; it
fit his finger as if made for it.

A shade of anger and vengeance passed across the usually calm brow of
this gentleman.

“It is impossible it can be she,” said he. “How could this ring come
into the hands of Milady Clarik? And yet it is difficult to suppose such
a resemblance should exist between two jewels.”

“Do you know this ring?” said d’Artagnan.

“I thought I did,” replied Athos; “but no doubt I was mistaken.” And he
returned d’Artagnan the ring without, however, ceasing to look at it.

“Pray, d’Artagnan,” said Athos, after a minute, “either take off that
ring or turn the mounting inside; it recalls such cruel recollections
that I shall have no head to converse with you. Don’t ask me for
counsel; don’t tell me you are perplexed what to do. But stop! let me
look at that sapphire again; the one I mentioned to you had one of its
faces scratched by accident.”

D’Artagnan took off the ring, giving it again to Athos.

Athos started. “Look,” said he, “is it not strange?” and he pointed out
to d’Artagnan the scratch he had remembered.

“But from whom did this ring come to you, Athos?”

“From my mother, who inherited it from her mother. As I told you, it is
an old family jewel.”

“And you--sold it?” asked d’Artagnan, hesitatingly.

“No,” replied Athos, with a singular smile. “I gave it away in a night
of love, as it has been given to you.”

D’Artagnan became pensive in his turn; it appeared as if there were
abysses in Milady’s soul whose depths were dark and unknown. He took
back the ring, but put it in his pocket and not on his finger.

“d’Artagnan,” said Athos, taking his hand, “you know I love you; if I
had a son I could not love him better. Take my advice, renounce this
woman. I do not know her, but a sort of intuition tells me she is a lost
creature, and that there is something fatal about her.”

“You are right,” said d’Artagnan; “I will have done with her. I own that
this woman terrifies me.”

“Shall you have the courage?” said Athos.

“I shall,” replied d’Artagnan, “and instantly.”

“In truth, my young friend, you will act rightly,” said the gentleman,
pressing the Gascon’s hand with an affection almost paternal; “and God
grant that this woman, who has scarcely entered into your life, may not
leave a terrible trace in it!” And Athos bowed to d’Artagnan like a man
who wishes it understood that he would not be sorry to be left alone
with his thoughts.

On reaching home d’Artagnan found Kitty waiting for him. A month of
fever could not have changed her more than this one night of
sleeplessness and sorrow.

She was sent by her mistress to the false de Wardes. Her mistress was
mad with love, intoxicated with joy. She wished to know when her lover
would meet her a second night; and poor Kitty, pale and trembling,
awaited d’Artagnan’s reply. The counsels of his friend, joined to the
cries of his own heart, made him determine, now his pride was saved and
his vengeance satisfied, not to see Milady again. As a reply, he wrote
the following letter:

Do not depend upon me, madame, for the next meeting. Since my
convalescence I have so many affairs of this kind on my hands that I am
forced to regulate them a little. When your turn comes, I shall have the
honor to inform you of it. I kiss your hands.

Comte de Wardes

Not a word about the sapphire. Was the Gascon determined to keep it as a
weapon against Milady, or else, let us be frank, did he not reserve the
sapphire as a last resource for his outfit? It would be wrong to judge
the actions of one period from the point of view of another. That which
would now be considered as disgraceful to a gentleman was at that time
quite a simple and natural affair, and the younger sons of the best
families were frequently supported by their mistresses. D’Artagnan gave
the open letter to Kitty, who at first was unable to comprehend it, but
who became almost wild with joy on reading it a second time. She could
scarcely believe in her happiness; and d’Artagnan was forced to renew
with the living voice the assurances which he had written. And whatever
might be--considering the violent character of Milady--the danger which
the poor girl incurred in giving this billet to her mistress, she ran
back to the Place Royale as fast as her legs could carry her.

The heart of the best woman is pitiless toward the sorrows of a rival.

Milady opened the letter with eagerness equal to Kitty’s in bringing it;
but at the first words she read she became livid. She crushed the paper
in her hand, and turning with flashing eyes upon Kitty, she cried, “What
is this letter?”

“The answer to Madame’s,” replied Kitty, all in a tremble.

“Impossible!” cried Milady. “It is impossible a gentleman could have
written such a letter to a woman.” Then all at once, starting, she
cried, “My God! can he have--” and she stopped. She ground her teeth;
she was of the color of ashes. She tried to go toward the window for
air, but she could only stretch forth her arms; her legs failed her, and
she sank into an armchair. Kitty, fearing she was ill, hastened toward
her and was beginning to open her dress; but Milady started up, pushing
her away. “What do you want with me?” said she, “and why do you place
your hand on me?”

“I thought that Madame was ill, and I wished to bring her help,”
responded the maid, frightened at the terrible expression which had come
over her mistress’s face.

“I faint? I? I? Do you take me for half a woman? When I am insulted I do
not faint; I avenge myself!”

And she made a sign for Kitty to leave the room.




36 DREAM OF VENGEANCE


That evening Milady gave orders that when M. d’Artagnan came as usual,
he should be immediately admitted; but he did not come.

The next day Kitty went to see the young man again, and related to him
all that had passed on the preceding evening. D’Artagnan smiled; this
jealous anger of Milady was his revenge.

That evening Milady was still more impatient than on the preceding
evening. She renewed the order relative to the Gascon; but as before she
expected him in vain.

The next morning, when Kitty presented herself at d’Artagnan’s, she was
no longer joyous and alert as on the two preceding days; but on the
contrary sad as death.

D’Artagnan asked the poor girl what was the matter with her; but she, as
her only reply, drew a letter from her pocket and gave it to him.

This letter was in Milady’s handwriting; only this time it was addressed
to M. d’Artagnan, and not to M. de Wardes.

He opened it and read as follows:

Dear M. d’Artagnan, It is wrong thus to neglect your friends,
particularly at the moment you are about to leave them for so long a
time. My brother-in-law and myself expected you yesterday and the day
before, but in vain. Will it be the same this evening?

Your very grateful, Milady Clarik

“That’s all very simple,” said d’Artagnan; “I expected this letter. My
credit rises by the fall of that of the Comte de Wardes.”

“And will you go?” asked Kitty.

“Listen to me, my dear girl,” said the Gascon, who sought for an excuse
in his own eyes for breaking the promise he had made Athos; “you must
understand it would be impolitic not to accept such a positive
invitation. Milady, not seeing me come again, would not be able to
understand what could cause the interruption of my visits, and might
suspect something; who could say how far the vengeance of such a woman
would go?”

“Oh, my God!” said Kitty, “you know how to represent things in such a
way that you are always in the right. You are going now to pay your
court to her again, and if this time you succeed in pleasing her in your
own name and with your own face, it will be much worse than before.”

Instinct made poor Kitty guess a part of what was to happen. D’Artagnan
reassured her as well as he could, and promised to remain insensible to
the seductions of Milady.

He desired Kitty to tell her mistress that he could not be more grateful
for her kindnesses than he was, and that he would be obedient to her
orders. He did not dare to write for fear of not being able--to such
experienced eyes as those of Milady--to disguise his writing
sufficiently.

As nine o’clock sounded, d’Artagnan was at the Place Royale. It was
evident that the servants who waited in the antechamber were warned, for
as soon as d’Artagnan appeared, before even he had asked if Milady were
visible, one of them ran to announce him.

“Show him in,” said Milady, in a quick tone, but so piercing that
d’Artagnan heard her in the antechamber.

He was introduced.

“I am at home to nobody,” said Milady; “observe, to nobody.” The servant
went out.

D’Artagnan cast an inquiring glance at Milady. She was pale, and looked
fatigued, either from tears or want of sleep. The number of lights had
been intentionally diminished, but the young woman could not conceal the
traces of the fever which had devoured her for two days.

D’Artagnan approached her with his usual gallantry. She then made an
extraordinary effort to receive him, but never did a more distressed
countenance give the lie to a more amiable smile.

To the questions which d’Artagnan put concerning her health, she
replied, “Bad, very bad.”

“Then,” replied he, “my visit is ill-timed; you, no doubt, stand in need
of repose, and I will withdraw.”

“No, no!” said Milady. “On the contrary, stay, Monsieur d’Artagnan; your
agreeable company will divert me.”

“Oh, oh!” thought d’Artagnan. “She has never been so kind before. On
guard!”

Milady assumed the most agreeable air possible, and conversed with more
than her usual brilliancy. At the same time the fever, which for an
instant abandoned her, returned to give luster to her eyes, color to her
cheeks, and vermillion to her lips. D’Artagnan was again in the presence
of the Circe who had before surrounded him with her enchantments. His
love, which he believed to be extinct but which was only asleep, awoke
again in his heart. Milady smiled, and d’Artagnan felt that he could
damn himself for that smile. There was a moment at which he felt
something like remorse.

By degrees, Milady became more communicative. She asked d’Artagnan if he
had a mistress.

“Alas!” said d’Artagnan, with the most sentimental air he could assume,
“can you be cruel enough to put such a question to me--to me, who, from
the moment I saw you, have only breathed and sighed through you and for
you?”

Milady smiled with a strange smile.

“Then you love me?” said she.

“Have I any need to tell you so? Have you not perceived it?”

“It may be; but you know the more hearts are worth the capture, the more
difficult they are to be won.”

“Oh, difficulties do not affright me,” said d’Artagnan. “I shrink before
nothing but impossibilities.”

“Nothing is impossible,” replied Milady, “to true love.”

“Nothing, madame?”

“Nothing,” replied Milady.

“The devil!” thought d’Artagnan. “The note is changed. Is she going to
fall in love with me, by chance, this fair inconstant; and will she be
disposed to give me myself another sapphire like that which she gave me
for de Wardes?”

D’Artagnan rapidly drew his seat nearer to Milady’s.

“Well, now,” she said, “let us see what you would do to prove this love
of which you speak.”

“All that could be required of me. Order; I am ready.”

“For everything?”

“For everything,” cried d’Artagnan, who knew beforehand that he had not
much to risk in engaging himself thus.

“Well, now let us talk a little seriously,” said Milady, in her turn
drawing her armchair nearer to d’Artagnan’s chair.

“I am all attention, madame,” said he.

Milady remained thoughtful and undecided for a moment; then, as if
appearing to have formed a resolution, she said, “I have an enemy.”

“You, madame!” said d’Artagnan, affecting surprise; “is that possible,
my God?--good and beautiful as you are!”

“A mortal enemy.”

“Indeed!”

“An enemy who has insulted me so cruelly that between him and me it is
war to the death. May I reckon on you as an auxiliary?”

D’Artagnan at once perceived the ground which the vindictive creature
wished to reach.

“You may, madame,” said he, with emphasis. “My arm and my life belong to
you, like my love.”

“Then,” said Milady, “since you are as generous as you are loving--”

She stopped.

“Well?” demanded d’Artagnan.

“Well,” replied Milady, after a moment of silence, “from the present
time, cease to talk of impossibilities.”

“Do not overwhelm me with happiness,” cried d’Artagnan, throwing himself
on his knees, and covering with kisses the hands abandoned to him.

“Avenge me of that infamous de Wardes,” said Milady, between her teeth,
“and I shall soon know how to get rid of you--you double idiot, you
animated sword blade!”

“Fall voluntarily into my arms, hypocritical and dangerous woman,” said
d’Artagnan, likewise to himself, “after having abused me with such
effrontery, and afterward I will laugh at you with him whom you wish me
to kill.”

D’Artagnan lifted up his head.

“I am ready,” said he.

“You have understood me, then, dear Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Milady.

“I could interpret one of your looks.”

“Then you would employ for me your arm which has already acquired so
much renown?”

“Instantly!”

“But on my part,” said Milady, “how should I repay such a service? I
know these lovers. They are men who do nothing for nothing.”

“You know the only reply that I desire,” said d’Artagnan, “the only one
worthy of you and of me!”

And he drew nearer to her.

She scarcely resisted.

“Interested man!” cried she, smiling.

“Ah,” cried d’Artagnan, really carried away by the passion this woman
had the power to kindle in his heart, “ah, that is because my happiness
appears so impossible to me; and I have such fear that it should fly
away from me like a dream that I pant to make a reality of it.”

“Well, merit this pretended happiness, then!”

“I am at your orders,” said d’Artagnan.

“Quite certain?” said Milady, with a last doubt.

“Only name to me the base man that has brought tears into your beautiful
eyes!”

“Who told you that I had been weeping?” said she.

“It appeared to me--”

“Such women as I never weep,” said Milady.

“So much the better! Come, tell me his name!”

“Remember that his name is all my secret.”

“Yet I must know his name.”

“Yes, you must; see what confidence I have in you!”

“You overwhelm me with joy. What is his name?”

“You know him.”

“Indeed.”

“Yes.”

“It is surely not one of my friends?” replied d’Artagnan, affecting
hesitation in order to make her believe him ignorant.

“If it were one of your friends you would hesitate, then?” cried Milady;
and a threatening glance darted from her eyes.

“Not if it were my own brother!” cried d’Artagnan, as if carried away by
his enthusiasm.

Our Gascon promised this without risk, for he knew all that was meant.

“I love your devotedness,” said Milady.

“Alas, do you love nothing else in me?” asked d’Artagnan.

“I love you also, YOU!” said she, taking his hand.

The warm pressure made d’Artagnan tremble, as if by the touch that fever
which consumed Milady attacked himself.

“You love me, you!” cried he. “Oh, if that were so, I should lose my
reason!”

And he folded her in his arms. She made no effort to remove her lips
from his kisses; only she did not respond to them. Her lips were cold;
it appeared to d’Artagnan that he had embraced a statue.

He was not the less intoxicated with joy, electrified by love. He almost
believed in the tenderness of Milady; he almost believed in the crime of
de Wardes. If de Wardes had at that moment been under his hand, he would
have killed him.

Milady seized the occasion.

“His name is--” said she, in her turn.

“De Wardes; I know it,” cried d’Artagnan.

“And how do you know it?” asked Milady, seizing both his hands, and
endeavoring to read with her eyes to the bottom of his heart.

D’Artagnan felt he had allowed himself to be carried away, and that he
had committed an error.

“Tell me, tell me, tell me, I say,” repeated Milady, “how do you know
it?”

“How do I know it?” said d’Artagnan.

“Yes.”

“I know it because yesterday Monsieur de Wardes, in a saloon where I
was, showed a ring which he said he had received from you.”

“Wretch!” cried Milady.

The epithet, as may be easily understood, resounded to the very bottom
of d’Artagnan’s heart.

“Well?” continued she.

“Well, I will avenge you of this wretch,” replied d’Artagnan, giving
himself the airs of Don Japhet of Armenia.

“Thanks, my brave friend!” cried Milady; “and when shall I be avenged?”

“Tomorrow--immediately--when you please!”

Milady was about to cry out, “Immediately,” but she reflected that such
precipitation would not be very gracious toward d’Artagnan.

Besides, she had a thousand precautions to take, a thousand counsels to
give to her defender, in order that he might avoid explanations with the
count before witnesses. All this was answered by an expression of
d’Artagnan’s. “Tomorrow,” said he, “you will be avenged, or I shall be
dead.”

“No,” said she, “you will avenge me; but you will not be dead. He is a
coward.”

“With women, perhaps; but not with men. I know something of him.”

“But it seems you had not much reason to complain of your fortune in
your contest with him.”

“Fortune is a courtesan; favorable yesterday, she may turn her back
tomorrow.”

“Which means that you now hesitate?”

“No, I do not hesitate; God forbid! But would it be just to allow me to
go to a possible death without having given me at least something more
than hope?”

Milady answered by a glance which said, “Is that all?--speak, then.” And
then accompanying the glance with explanatory words, “That is but too
just,” said she, tenderly.

“Oh, you are an angel!” exclaimed the young man.

“Then all is agreed?” said she.

“Except that which I ask of you, dear love.”

“But when I assure you that you may rely on my tenderness?”

“I cannot wait till tomorrow.”

“Silence! I hear my brother. It will be useless for him to find you
here.”

She rang the bell and Kitty appeared.

“Go out this way,” said she, opening a small private door, “and come
back at eleven o’clock; we will then terminate this conversation. Kitty
will conduct you to my chamber.”

The poor girl almost fainted at hearing these words.

“Well, mademoiselle, what are you thinking about, standing there like a
statue? Do as I bid you: show the chevalier out; and this evening at
eleven o’clock--you have heard what I said.”

“It appears that these appointments are all made for eleven o’clock,”
thought d’Artagnan; “that’s a settled custom.”

Milady held out her hand to him, which he kissed tenderly.

“But,” said he, as he retired as quickly as possible from the reproaches
of Kitty, “I must not play the fool. This woman is certainly a great
liar. I must take care.”




37 MILADY’S SECRET


D’Artagnan left the hotel instead of going up at once to Kitty’s
chamber, as she endeavored to persuade him to do--and that for two
reasons: the first, because by this means he should escape reproaches,
recriminations, and prayers; the second, because he was not sorry to
have an opportunity of reading his own thoughts and endeavoring, if
possible, to fathom those of this woman.

What was most clear in the matter was that d’Artagnan loved Milady like
a madman, and that she did not love him at all. In an instant d’Artagnan
perceived that the best way in which he could act would be to go home
and write Milady a long letter, in which he would confess to her that he
and de Wardes were, up to the present moment absolutely the same, and
that consequently he could not undertake, without committing suicide, to
kill the Comte de Wardes. But he also was spurred on by a ferocious
desire of vengeance. He wished to subdue this woman in his own name; and
as this vengeance appeared to him to have a certain sweetness in it, he
could not make up his mind to renounce it.

He walked six or seven times round the Place Royale, turning at every
ten steps to look at the light in Milady’s apartment, which was to be
seen through the blinds. It was evident that this time the young woman
was not in such haste to retire to her apartment as she had been the
first.

At length the light disappeared. With this light was extinguished the
last irresolution in the heart of d’Artagnan. He recalled to his mind
the details of the first night, and with a beating heart and a brain on
fire he re-entered the hotel and flew toward Kitty’s chamber.

The poor girl, pale as death and trembling in all her limbs, wished to
delay her lover; but Milady, with her ear on the watch, had heard the
noise d’Artagnan had made, and opening the door, said, “Come in.”

All this was of such incredible immodesty, of such monstrous effrontery,
that d’Artagnan could scarcely believe what he saw or what he heard. He
imagined himself to be drawn into one of those fantastic intrigues one
meets in dreams. He, however, darted not the less quickly toward Milady,
yielding to that magnetic attraction which the loadstone exercises over
iron.

As the door closed after them Kitty rushed toward it. Jealousy, fury,
offended pride, all the passions in short that dispute the heart of an
outraged woman in love, urged her to make a revelation; but she
reflected that she would be totally lost if she confessed having
assisted in such a machination, and above all, that d’Artagnan would
also be lost to her forever. This last thought of love counseled her to
make this last sacrifice.

D’Artagnan, on his part, had gained the summit of all his wishes. It was
no longer a rival who was beloved; it was himself who was apparently
beloved. A secret voice whispered to him, at the bottom of his heart,
that he was but an instrument of vengeance, that he was only caressed
till he had given death; but pride, but self-love, but madness silenced
this voice and stifled its murmurs. And then our Gascon, with that large
quantity of conceit which we know he possessed, compared himself with de
Wardes, and asked himself why, after all, he should not be beloved for
himself?

He was absorbed entirely by the sensations of the moment. Milady was no
longer for him that woman of fatal intentions who had for a moment
terrified him; she was an ardent, passionate mistress, abandoning
herself to love which she also seemed to feel. Two hours thus glided
away. When the transports of the two lovers were calmer, Milady, who had
not the same motives for forgetfulness that d’Artagnan had, was the
first to return to reality, and asked the young man if the means which
were on the morrow to bring on the encounter between him and de Wardes
were already arranged in his mind.

But d’Artagnan, whose ideas had taken quite another course, forgot
himself like a fool, and answered gallantly that it was too late to
think about duels and sword thrusts.

This coldness toward the only interests that occupied her mind terrified
Milady, whose questions became more pressing.

Then d’Artagnan, who had never seriously thought of this impossible
duel, endeavored to turn the conversation; but he could not succeed.
Milady kept him within the limits she had traced beforehand with her
irresistible spirit and her iron will.

D’Artagnan fancied himself very cunning when advising Milady to
renounce, by pardoning de Wardes, the furious projects she had formed.

But at the first word the young woman started, and exclaimed in a sharp,
bantering tone, which sounded strangely in the darkness, “Are you
afraid, dear Monsieur d’Artagnan?”

“You cannot think so, dear love!” replied d’Artagnan; “but now, suppose
this poor Comte de Wardes were less guilty than you think him?”

“At all events,” said Milady, seriously, “he has deceived me, and from
the moment he deceived me, he merited death.”

“He shall die, then, since you condemn him!” said d’Artagnan, in so firm
a tone that it appeared to Milady an undoubted proof of devotion. This
reassured her.

We cannot say how long the night seemed to Milady, but d’Artagnan
believed it to be hardly two hours before the daylight peeped through
the window blinds, and invaded the chamber with its paleness. Seeing
d’Artagnan about to leave her, Milady recalled his promise to avenge her
on the Comte de Wardes.

“I am quite ready,” said d’Artagnan; “but in the first place I should
like to be certain of one thing.”

“And what is that?” asked Milady.

“That is, whether you really love me?”

“I have given you proof of that, it seems to me.”

“And I am yours, body and soul!”

“Thanks, my brave lover; but as you are satisfied of my love, you must,
in your turn, satisfy me of yours. Is it not so?”

“Certainly; but if you love me as much as you say,” replied d’Artagnan,
“do you not entertain a little fear on my account?”

“What have I to fear?”

“Why, that I may be dangerously wounded--killed even.”

“Impossible!” cried Milady, “you are such a valiant man, and such an
expert swordsman.”

“You would not, then, prefer a method,” resumed d’Artagnan, “which would
equally avenge you while rendering the combat useless?”

Milady looked at her lover in silence. The pale light of the first rays
of day gave to her clear eyes a strangely frightful expression.

“Really,” said she, “I believe you now begin to hesitate.”

“No, I do not hesitate; but I really pity this poor Comte de Wardes,
since you have ceased to love him. I think that a man must be so
severely punished by the loss of your love that he stands in need of no
other chastisement.”

“Who told you that I loved him?” asked Milady, sharply.

“At least, I am now at liberty to believe, without too much fatuity,
that you love another,” said the young man, in a caressing tone, “and I
repeat that I am really interested for the count.”

“You?” asked Milady.

“Yes, I.”

“And why YOU?”

“Because I alone know--”

“What?”

“That he is far from being, or rather having been, so guilty toward you
as he appears.”

“Indeed!” said Milady, in an anxious tone; “explain yourself, for I
really cannot tell what you mean.”

And she looked at d’Artagnan, who embraced her tenderly, with eyes which
seemed to burn themselves away.

“Yes; I am a man of honor,” said d’Artagnan, determined to come to an
end, “and since your love is mine, and I am satisfied I possess it--for
I do possess it, do I not?”

“Entirely; go on.”

“Well, I feel as if transformed--a confession weighs on my mind.”

“A confession!”

“If I had the least doubt of your love I would not make it, but you love
me, my beautiful mistress, do you not?”

“Without doubt.”

“Then if through excess of love I have rendered myself culpable toward
you, you will pardon me?”

“Perhaps.”

D’Artagnan tried with his sweetest smile to touch his lips to Milady’s,
but she evaded him.

“This confession,” said she, growing paler, “what is this confession?”

“You gave de Wardes a meeting on Thursday last in this very room, did
you not?”

“No, no! It is not true,” said Milady, in a tone of voice so firm, and
with a countenance so unchanged, that if d’Artagnan had not been in such
perfect possession of the fact, he would have doubted.

“Do not lie, my angel,” said d’Artagnan, smiling; “that would be
useless.”

“What do you mean? Speak! you kill me.”

“Be satisfied; you are not guilty toward me, and I have already pardoned
you.”

“What next? what next?”

“De Wardes cannot boast of anything.”

“How is that? You told me yourself that that ring--”

“That ring I have! The Comte de Wardes of Thursday and the d’Artagnan of
today are the same person.”

The imprudent young man expected a surprise, mixed with shame--a slight
storm which would resolve itself into tears; but he was strangely
deceived, and his error was not of long duration.

Pale and trembling, Milady repulsed d’Artagnan’s attempted embrace by a
violent blow on the chest, as she sprang out of bed.

It was almost broad daylight.

D’Artagnan detained her by her night dress of fine India linen, to
implore her pardon; but she, with a strong movement, tried to escape.
Then the cambric was torn from her beautiful shoulders; and on one of
those lovely shoulders, round and white, d’Artagnan recognized, with
inexpressible astonishment, the FLEUR-DE-LIS--that indelible mark which
the hand of the infamous executioner had imprinted.

“Great God!” cried d’Artagnan, loosing his hold of her dress, and
remaining mute, motionless, and frozen.

But Milady felt herself denounced even by his terror. He had doubtless
seen all. The young man now knew her secret, her terrible secret--the
secret she concealed even from her maid with such care, the secret of
which all the world was ignorant, except himself.

She turned upon him, no longer like a furious woman, but like a wounded
panther.

“Ah, wretch!” cried she, “you have basely betrayed me, and still more,
you have my secret! You shall die.”

And she flew to a little inlaid casket which stood upon the dressing
table, opened it with a feverish and trembling hand, drew from it a
small poniard, with a golden haft and a sharp thin blade, and then threw
herself with a bound upon d’Artagnan.

Although the young man was brave, as we know, he was terrified at that
wild countenance, those terribly dilated pupils, those pale cheeks, and
those bleeding lips. He recoiled to the other side of the room as he
would have done from a serpent which was crawling toward him, and his
sword coming in contact with his nervous hand, he drew it almost
unconsciously from the scabbard. But without taking any heed of the
sword, Milady endeavored to get near enough to him to stab him, and did
not stop till she felt the sharp point at her throat.

She then tried to seize the sword with her hands; but d’Artagnan kept it
free from her grasp, and presenting the point, sometimes at her eyes,
sometimes at her breast, compelled her to glide behind the bedstead,
while he aimed at making his retreat by the door which led to Kitty’s
apartment.

Milady during this time continued to strike at him with horrible fury,
screaming in a formidable way.

As all this, however, bore some resemblance to a duel, d’Artagnan began
to recover himself little by little.

“Well, beautiful lady, very well,” said he; “but, PARDIEU, if you don’t
calm yourself, I will design a second FLEUR-DE-LIS upon one of those
pretty cheeks!”

“Scoundrel, infamous scoundrel!” howled Milady.

But d’Artagnan, still keeping on the defensive, drew near to Kitty’s
door. At the noise they made, she in overturning the furniture in her
efforts to get at him, he in screening himself behind the furniture to
keep out of her reach, Kitty opened the door. D’Artagnan, who had
unceasingly maneuvered to gain this point, was not at more than three
paces from it. With one spring he flew from the chamber of Milady into
that of the maid, and quick as lightning, he slammed to the door, and
placed all his weight against it, while Kitty pushed the bolts.

Then Milady attempted to tear down the doorcase, with a strength
apparently above that of a woman; but finding she could not accomplish
this, she in her fury stabbed at the door with her poniard, the point of
which repeatedly glittered through the wood. Every blow was accompanied
with terrible imprecations.

“Quick, Kitty, quick!” said d’Artagnan, in a low voice, as soon as the
bolts were fast, “let me get out of the hotel; for if we leave her time
to turn round, she will have me killed by the servants.”

“But you can’t go out so,” said Kitty; “you are naked.”

“That’s true,” said d’Artagnan, then first thinking of the costume he
found himself in, “that’s true. But dress me as well as you are able,
only make haste; think, my dear girl, it’s life and death!”

Kitty was but too well aware of that. In a turn of the hand she muffled
him up in a flowered robe, a large hood, and a cloak. She gave him some
slippers, in which he placed his naked feet, and then conducted him down
the stairs. It was time. Milady had already rung her bell, and roused
the whole hotel. The porter was drawing the cord at the moment Milady
cried from her window, “Don’t open!”

The young man fled while she was still threatening him with an impotent
gesture. The moment she lost sight of him, Milady tumbled fainting into
her chamber.




38 HOW, WITHOUT INCOMMDING HIMSELF, ATHOS PROCURES HIS EQUIPMENT


D’Artagnan was so completely bewildered that without taking any heed of
what might become of Kitty he ran at full speed across half Paris, and
did not stop till he came to Athos’s door. The confusion of his mind,
the terror which spurred him on, the cries of some of the patrol who
started in pursuit of him, and the hooting of the people who,
notwithstanding the early hour, were going to their work, only made him
precipitate his course.

He crossed the court, ran up the two flights to Athos’s apartment, and
knocked at the door enough to break it down.

Grimaud came, rubbing his half-open eyes, to answer this noisy summons,
and d’Artagnan sprang with such violence into the room as nearly to
overturn the astonished lackey.

In spite of his habitual silence, the poor lad this time found his
speech.

“Holloa, there!” cried he; “what do you want, you strumpet? What’s your
business here, you hussy?”

D’Artagnan threw off his hood, and disengaged his hands from the folds
of the cloak. At sight of the mustaches and the naked sword, the poor
devil perceived he had to deal with a man. He then concluded it must be
an assassin.

“Help! murder! help!” cried he.

“Hold your tongue, you stupid fellow!” said the young man; “I am
d’Artagnan; don’t you know me? Where is your master?”

“You, Monsieur d’Artagnan!” cried Grimaud, “impossible.”

“Grimaud,” said Athos, coming out of his apartment in a dressing gown,
“Grimaud, I thought I heard you permitting yourself to speak?”

“Ah, monsieur, it is--”

“Silence!”

Grimaud contented himself with pointing d’Artagnan out to his master
with his finger.

Athos recognized his comrade, and phlegmatic as he was, he burst into a
laugh which was quite excused by the strange masquerade before his
eyes--petticoats falling over his shoes, sleeves tucked up, and
mustaches stiff with agitation.

“Don’t laugh, my friend!” cried d’Artagnan; “for heaven’s sake, don’t
laugh, for upon my soul, it’s no laughing matter!”

And he pronounced these words with such a solemn air and with such a
real appearance of terror, that Athos eagerly seized his hand, crying,
“Are you wounded, my friend? How pale you are!”

“No, but I have just met with a terrible adventure! Are you alone,
Athos?”

“PARBLEU! whom do you expect to find with me at this hour?”

“Well, well!” and d’Artagnan rushed into Athos’s chamber.

“Come, speak!” said the latter, closing the door and bolting it, that
they might not be disturbed. “Is the king dead? Have you killed the
cardinal? You are quite upset! Come, come, tell me; I am dying with
curiosity and uneasiness!”

“Athos,” said d’Artagnan, getting rid of his female garments, and
appearing in his shirt, “prepare yourself to hear an incredible, an
unheard-of story.”

“Well, but put on this dressing gown first,” said the Musketeer to his
friend.

D’Artagnan donned the robe as quickly as he could, mistaking one sleeve
for the other, so greatly was he still agitated.

“Well?” said Athos.

“Well,” replied d’Artagnan, bending his mouth to Athos’s ear, and
lowering his voice, “Milady is marked with a FLEUR-DE-LIS upon her
shoulder!”

“Ah!” cried the Musketeer, as if he had received a ball in his heart.

“Let us see,” said d’Artagnan. “Are you SURE that the OTHER is dead?”

“THE OTHER?” said Athos, in so stifled a voice that d’Artagnan scarcely
heard him.

“Yes, she of whom you told me one day at Amiens.”

Athos uttered a groan, and let his head sink on his hands.

“This is a woman of twenty-six or twenty-eight years.”

“Fair,” said Athos, “is she not?”

“Very.”

“Blue and clear eyes, of a strange brilliancy, with black eyelids and
eyebrows?”

“Yes.”

“Tall, well-made? She has lost a tooth, next to the eyetooth on the
left?”

“Yes.”

“The FLEUR-DE-LIS is small, rosy in color, and looks as if efforts had
been made to efface it by the application of poultices?”

“Yes.”

“But you say she is English?”

“She is called Milady, but she may be French. Lord de Winter is only her
brother-in-law.”

“I will see her, d’Artagnan!”

“Beware, Athos, beware. You tried to kill her; she is a woman to return
you the like, and not to fail.”

“She will not dare to say anything; that would be to denounce herself.”

“She is capable of anything or everything. Did you ever see her
furious?”

“No,” said Athos.

“A tigress, a panther! Ah, my dear Athos, I am greatly afraid I have
drawn a terrible vengeance on both of us!”

D’Artagnan then related all--the mad passion of Milady and her menaces
of death.

“You are right; and upon my soul, I would give my life for a hair,” said
Athos. “Fortunately, the day after tomorrow we leave Paris. We are going
according to all probability to La Rochelle, and once gone--”

“She will follow you to the end of the world, Athos, if she recognizes
you. Let her, then, exhaust her vengeance on me alone!”

“My dear friend, of what consequence is it if she kills me?” said Athos.
“Do you, perchance, think I set any great store by life?”

“There is something horribly mysterious under all this, Athos; this
woman is one of the cardinal’s spies, I am sure of that.”

“In that case, take care! If the cardinal does not hold you in high
admiration for the affair of London, he entertains a great hatred for
you; but as, considering everything, he cannot accuse you openly, and as
hatred must be satisfied, particularly when it’s a cardinal’s hatred,
take care of yourself. If you go out, do not go out alone; when you eat,
use every precaution. Mistrust everything, in short, even your own
shadow.”

“Fortunately,” said d’Artagnan, “all this will be only necessary till
after tomorrow evening, for when once with the army, we shall have, I
hope, only men to dread.”

“In the meantime,” said Athos, “I renounce my plan of seclusion, and
wherever you go, I will go with you. You must return to the Rue des
Fossoyeurs; I will accompany you.”

“But however near it may be,” replied d’Artagnan, “I cannot go thither
in this guise.”

“That’s true,” said Athos, and he rang the bell.

Grimaud entered.

Athos made him a sign to go to d’Artagnan’s residence, and bring back
some clothes. Grimaud replied by another sign that he understood
perfectly, and set off.

“All this will not advance your outfit,” said Athos; “for if I am not
mistaken, you have left the best of your apparel with Milady, and she
will certainly not have the politeness to return it to you. Fortunately,
you have the sapphire.”

“The jewel is yours, my dear Athos! Did you not tell me it was a family
jewel?”

“Yes, my grandfather gave two thousand crowns for it, as he once told
me. It formed part of the nuptial present he made his wife, and it is
magnificent. My mother gave it to me, and I, fool as I was, instead of
keeping the ring as a holy relic, gave it to this wretch.”

“Then, my friend, take back this ring, to which I see you attach much
value.”

“I take back the ring, after it has passed through the hands of that
infamous creature? Never; that ring is defiled, d’Artagnan.”

“Sell it, then.”

“Sell a jewel which came from my mother! I vow I should consider it a
profanation.”

“Pledge it, then; you can borrow at least a thousand crowns on it. With
that sum you can extricate yourself from your present difficulties; and
when you are full of money again, you can redeem it, and take it back
cleansed from its ancient stains, as it will have passed through the
hands of usurers.”

Athos smiled.

“You are a capital companion, d’Artagnan,” said be; “your never-failing
cheerfulness raises poor souls in affliction. Well, let us pledge the
ring, but upon one condition.”

“What?”

“That there shall be five hundred crowns for you, and five hundred
crowns for me.”

“Don’t dream it, Athos. I don’t need the quarter of such a sum--I who am
still only in the Guards--and by selling my saddles, I shall procure it.
What do I want? A horse for Planchet, that’s all. Besides, you forget
that I have a ring likewise.”

“To which you attach more value, it seems, than I do to mine; at least,
I have thought so.”

“Yes, for in any extreme circumstance it might not only extricate us
from some great embarrassment, but even a great danger. It is not only a
valuable diamond, but it is an enchanted talisman.”

“I don’t at all understand you, but I believe all you say to be true.
Let us return to my ring, or rather to yours. You shall take half the
sum that will be advanced upon it, or I will throw it into the Seine;
and I doubt, as was the case with Polycrates, whether any fish will be
sufficiently complaisant to bring it back to us.”

“Well, I will take it, then,” said d’Artagnan.

At this moment Grimaud returned, accompanied by Planchet; the latter,
anxious about his master and curious to know what had happened to him,
had taken advantage of the opportunity and brought the garments himself.

d’Artagnan dressed himself, and Athos did the same. When the two were
ready to go out, the latter made Grimaud the sign of a man taking aim,
and the lackey immediately took down his musketoon, and prepared to
follow his master.

They arrived without accident at the Rue des Fossoyeurs. Bonacieux was
standing at the door, and looked at d’Artagnan hatefully.

“Make haste, dear lodger,” said he; “there is a very pretty girl waiting
for you upstairs; and you know women don’t like to be kept waiting.”

“That’s Kitty!” said d’Artagnan to himself, and darted into the passage.

Sure enough! Upon the landing leading to the chamber, and crouching
against the door, he found the poor girl, all in a tremble. As soon as
she perceived him, she cried, “You have promised your protection; you
have promised to save me from her anger. Remember, it is you who have
ruined me!”

“Yes, yes, to be sure, Kitty,” said d’Artagnan; “be at ease, my girl.
But what happened after my departure?”

“How can I tell!” said Kitty. “The lackeys were brought by the cries she
made. She was mad with passion. There exist no imprecations she did not
pour out against you. Then I thought she would remember it was through
my chamber you had penetrated hers, and that then she would suppose I
was your accomplice; so I took what little money I had and the best of
my things, and I got away.

“Poor dear girl! But what can I do with you? I am going away the day
after tomorrow.”

“Do what you please, Monsieur Chevalier. Help me out of Paris; help me
out of France!”

“I cannot take you, however, to the siege of La Rochelle,” aid
d’Artagnan.

“No; but you can place me in one of the provinces with some lady of your
acquaintance--in your own country, for instance.”

“My dear little love! In my country the ladies do without chambermaids.
But stop! I can manage your business for you. Planchet, go and find
Aramis. Request him to come here directly. We have something very
important to say to him.”

“I understand,” said Athos; “but why not Porthos? I should have thought
that his duchess--”

“Oh, Porthos’s duchess is dressed by her husband’s clerks,” said
d’Artagnan, laughing. “Besides, Kitty would not like to live in the Rue
aux Ours. Isn’t it so, Kitty?”

“I do not care where I live,” said Kitty, “provided I am well concealed,
and nobody knows where I am.”

“Meanwhile, Kitty, when we are about to separate, and you are no longer
jealous of me--”

“Monsieur Chevalier, far off or near,” said Kitty, “I shall always love
you.”

“Where the devil will constancy niche itself next?” murmured Athos.

“And I, also,” said d’Artagnan, “I also. I shall always love you; be
sure of that. But now answer me. I attach great importance to the
question I am about to put to you. Did you never hear talk of a young
woman who was carried off one night?”

“There, now! Oh, Monsieur Chevalier, do you love that woman still?”

“No, no; it is one of my friends who loves her--Monsieur Athos, this
gentleman here.”

“I?” cried Athos, with an accent like that of a man who perceives he is
about to tread upon an adder.

“You, to be sure!” said d’Artagnan, pressing Athos’s hand. “You know the
interest we both take in this poor little Madame Bonacieux. Besides,
Kitty will tell nothing; will you, Kitty? You understand, my dear girl,”
continued d’Artagnan, “she is the wife of that frightful baboon you saw
at the door as you came in.”

“Oh, my God! You remind me of my fright! If he should have known me
again!”

“How? know you again? Did you ever see that man before?”

“He came twice to Milady’s.”

“That’s it. About what time?”

“Why, about fifteen or eighteen days ago.”

“Exactly so.”

“And yesterday evening he came again.”

“Yesterday evening?”

“Yes, just before you came.”

“My dear Athos, we are enveloped in a network of spies. And do you
believe he knew you again, Kitty?”

“I pulled down my hood as soon as I saw him, but perhaps it was too
late.”

“Go down, Athos--he mistrusts you less than me--and see if he be still
at his door.”

Athos went down and returned immediately.

“He has gone,” said he, “and the house door is shut.”

“He has gone to make his report, and to say that all the pigeons are at
this moment in the dovecot.”

“Well, then, let us all fly,” said Athos, “and leave nobody here but
Planchet to bring us news.”

“A minute. Aramis, whom we have sent for!”

“That’s true,” said Athos; “we must wait for Aramis.”

At that moment Aramis entered.

The matter was all explained to him, and the friends gave him to
understand that among all his high connections he must find a place for
Kitty.

Aramis reflected for a minute, and then said, coloring, “Will it be
really rendering you a service, d’Artagnan?”

“I shall be grateful to you all my life.”

“Very well. Madame de Bois-Tracy asked me, for one of her friends who
resides in the provinces, I believe, for a trustworthy maid. If you can,
my dear d’Artagnan, answer for Mademoiselle-”

“Oh, monsieur, be assured that I shall be entirely devoted to the person
who will give me the means of quitting Paris.”

“Then,” said Aramis, “this falls out very well.”

He placed himself at the table and wrote a little note which he sealed
with a ring, and gave the billet to Kitty.

“And now, my dear girl,” said d’Artagnan, “you know that it is not good
for any of us to be here. Therefore let us separate. We shall meet again
in better days.”

“And whenever we find each other, in whatever place it may be,” said
Kitty, “you will find me loving you as I love you today.”

“Dicers’ oaths!” said Athos, while d’Artagnan went to conduct Kitty
downstairs.

An instant afterward the three young men separated, agreeing to meet
again at four o’clock with Athos, and leaving Planchet to guard the
house.

Aramis returned home, and Athos and d’Artagnan busied themselves about
pledging the sapphire.

As the Gascon had foreseen, they easily obtained three hundred pistoles
on the ring. Still further, the Jew told them that if they would sell it
to him, as it would make a magnificent pendant for earrings, he would
give five hundred pistoles for it.

Athos and d’Artagnan, with the activity of two soldiers and the
knowledge of two connoisseurs, hardly required three hours to purchase
the entire equipment of the Musketeer. Besides, Athos was very easy, and
a noble to his fingers’ ends. When a thing suited him he paid the price
demanded, without thinking to ask for any abatement. D’Artagnan would
have remonstrated at this; but Athos put his hand upon his shoulder,
with a smile, and d’Artagnan understood that it was all very well for
such a little Gascon gentleman as himself to drive a bargain, but not
for a man who had the bearing of a prince. The Musketeer met with a
superb Andalusian horse, black as jet, nostrils of fire, legs clean and
elegant, rising six years. He examined him, and found him sound and
without blemish. They asked a thousand livres for him.

He might perhaps have been bought for less; but while d’Artagnan was
discussing the price with the dealer, Athos was counting out the money
on the table.

Grimaud had a stout, short Picard cob, which cost three hundred livres.

But when the saddle and arms for Grimaud were purchased, Athos had not a
sou left of his hundred and fifty pistoles. D’Artagnan offered his
friend a part of his share which he should return when convenient.

But Athos only replied to this proposal by shrugging his shoulders.

“How much did the Jew say he would give for the sapphire if he purchased
it?” said Athos.

“Five hundred pistoles.”

“That is to say, two hundred more--a hundred pistoles for you and a
hundred pistoles for me. Well, now, that would be a real fortune to us,
my friend; let us go back to the Jew’s again.”

“What! will you--”

“This ring would certainly only recall very bitter remembrances; then we
shall never be masters of three hundred pistoles to redeem it, so that
we really should lose two hundred pistoles by the bargain. Go and tell
him the ring is his, d’Artagnan, and bring back the two hundred pistoles
with you.”

“Reflect, Athos!”

“Ready money is needful for the present time, and we must learn how to
make sacrifices. Go, d’Artagnan, go; Grimaud will accompany you with his
musketoon.”

A half hour afterward, d’Artagnan returned with the two thousand livres,
and without having met with any accident.

It was thus Athos found at home resources which he did not expect.




39 A VISION


At four o’clock the four friends were all assembled with Athos. Their
anxiety about their outfits had all disappeared, and each countenance
only preserved the expression of its own secret disquiet--for behind all
present happiness is concealed a fear for the future.

Suddenly Planchet entered, bringing two letters for d’Artagnan.

The one was a little billet, genteelly folded, with a pretty seal in
green wax on which was impressed a dove bearing a green branch.

The other was a large square epistle, resplendent with the terrible arms
of his Eminence the cardinal duke.

At the sight of the little letter the heart of d’Artagnan bounded, for
he believed he recognized the handwriting, and although he had seen that
writing but once, the memory of it remained at the bottom of his heart.

He therefore seized the little epistle, and opened it eagerly.

“Be,” said the letter, “on Thursday next, at from six to seven o’clock
in the evening, on the road to Chaillot, and look carefully into the
carriages that pass; but if you have any consideration for your own life
or that of those who love you, do not speak a single word, do not make a
movement which may lead anyone to believe you have recognized her who
exposes herself to everything for the sake of seeing you but for an
instant.”

No signature.

“That’s a snare,” said Athos; “don’t go, d’Artagnan.”

“And yet,” replied d’Artagnan, “I think I recognize the writing.”

“It may be counterfeit,” said Athos. “Between six and seven o’clock the
road of Chaillot is quite deserted; you might as well go and ride in the
forest of Bondy.”

“But suppose we all go,” said d’Artagnan; “what the devil! They won’t
devour us all four, four lackeys, horses, arms, and all!”

“And besides, it will be a chance for displaying our new equipments,”
said Porthos.

“But if it is a woman who writes,” said Aramis, “and that woman desires
not to be seen, remember, you compromise her, d’Artagnan; which is not
the part of a gentleman.”

“We will remain in the background,” said Porthos, “and he will advance
alone.”

“Yes; but a pistol shot is easily fired from a carriage which goes at a
gallop.”

“Bah!” said d’Artagnan, “they will miss me; if they fire we will ride
after the carriage, and exterminate those who may be in it. They must be
enemies.”

“He is right,” said Porthos; “battle. Besides, we must try our own
arms.”

“Bah, let us enjoy that pleasure,” said Aramis, with his mild and
careless manner.

“As you please,” said Athos.

“Gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, “it is half past four, and we have
scarcely time to be on the road of Chaillot by six.”

“Besides, if we go out too late, nobody will see us,” said Porthos, “and
that will be a pity. Let us get ready, gentlemen.”

“But this second letter,” said Athos, “you forget that; it appears to
me, however, that the seal denotes that it deserves to be opened. For my
part, I declare, d’Artagnan, I think it of much more consequence than
the little piece of waste paper you have so cunningly slipped into your
bosom.”

D’Artagnan blushed.

“Well,” said he, “let us see, gentlemen, what are his Eminence’s
commands,” and d’Artagnan unsealed the letter and read,

“M. d’Artagnan, of the king’s Guards, company Dessessart, is expected at
the Palais-Cardinal this evening, at eight o’clock.

“La Houdiniere, CAPTAIN OF THE GUARDS”

“The devil!” said Athos; “here’s a rendezvous much more serious than the
other.”

“I will go to the second after attending the first,” said d’Artagnan.
“One is for seven o’clock, and the other for eight; there will be time
for both.”

“Hum! I would not go at all,” said Aramis. “A gallant knight cannot
decline a rendezvous with a lady; but a prudent gentleman may excuse
himself from not waiting on his Eminence, particularly when he has
reason to believe he is not invited to make his compliments.”

“I am of Aramis’s opinion,” said Porthos.

“Gentlemen,” replied d’Artagnan, “I have already received by Monsieur de
Cavois a similar invitation from his Eminence. I neglected it, and on
the morrow a serious misfortune happened to me--Constance disappeared.
Whatever may ensue, I will go.”

“If you are determined,” said Athos, “do so.”

“But the Bastille?” said Aramis.

“Bah! you will get me out if they put me there,” said d’Artagnan.

“To be sure we will,” replied Aramis and Porthos, with admirable
promptness and decision, as if that were the simplest thing in the
world, “to be sure we will get you out; but meantime, as we are to set
off the day after tomorrow, you would do much better not to risk this
Bastille.”

“Let us do better than that,” said Athos; “do not let us leave him
during the whole evening. Let each of us wait at a gate of the palace
with three Musketeers behind him; if we see a close carriage, at all
suspicious in appearance, come out, let us fall upon it. It is a long
time since we have had a skirmish with the Guards of Monsieur the
Cardinal; Monsieur de Treville must think us dead.”

“To a certainty, Athos,” said Aramis, “you were meant to be a general of
the army! What do you think of the plan, gentlemen?”

“Admirable!” replied the young men in chorus.

“Well,” said Porthos, “I will run to the hotel, and engage our comrades
to hold themselves in readiness by eight o’clock; the rendezvous, the
Place du Palais-Cardinal. Meantime, you see that the lackeys saddle the
horses.”

“I have no horse,” said d’Artagnan; “but that is of no consequence, I
can take one of Monsieur de Treville’s.”

“That is not worth while,” said Aramis, “you can have one of mine.”

“One of yours! how many have you, then?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Three,” replied Aramis, smiling.

“Certes,” cried Athos, “you are the best-mounted poet of France or
Navarre.”

“Well, my dear Aramis, you don’t want three horses? I cannot comprehend
what induced you to buy three!”

“Therefore I only purchased two,” said Aramis.

“The third, then, fell from the clouds, I suppose?”

“No, the third was brought to me this very morning by a groom out of
livery, who would not tell me in whose service he was, and who said he
had received orders from his master.”

“Or his mistress,” interrupted d’Artagnan.

“That makes no difference,” said Aramis, coloring; “and who affirmed, as
I said, that he had received orders from his master or mistress to place
the horse in my stable, without informing me whence it came.”

“It is only to poets that such things happen,” said Athos, gravely.

“Well, in that case, we can manage famously,” said d’Artagnan; “which of
the two horses will you ride--that which you bought or the one that was
given to you?”

“That which was given to me, assuredly. You cannot for a moment imagine,
d’Artagnan, that I would commit such an offense toward--”

“The unknown giver,” interrupted d’Artagnan.

“Or the mysterious benefactress,” said Athos.

“The one you bought will then become useless to you?”

“Nearly so.”

“And you selected it yourself?”

“With the greatest care. The safety of the horseman, you know, depends
almost always upon the goodness of his horse.”

“Well, transfer it to me at the price it cost you?”

“I was going to make you the offer, my dear d’Artagnan, giving you all
the time necessary for repaying me such a trifle.”

“How much did it cost you?”

“Eight hundred livres.”

“Here are forty double pistoles, my dear friend,” said d’Artagnan,
taking the sum from his pocket; “I know that is the coin in which you
were paid for your poems.”

“You are rich, then?” said Aramis.

“Rich? Richest, my dear fellow!”

And d’Artagnan chinked the remainder of his pistoles in his pocket.

“Send your saddle, then, to the hotel of the Musketeers, and your horse
can be brought back with ours.”

“Very well; but it is already five o’clock, so make haste.”

A quarter of an hour afterward Porthos appeared at the end of the Rue
Ferou on a very handsome genet. Mousqueton followed him upon an Auvergne
horse, small but very handsome. Porthos was resplendent with joy and
pride.

At the same time, Aramis made his appearance at the other end of the
street upon a superb English charger. Bazin followed him upon a roan,
holding by the halter a vigorous Mecklenburg horse; this was
d’Artagnan’s mount.

The two Musketeers met at the gate. Athos and d’Artagnan watched their
approach from the window.

“The devil!” cried Aramis, “you have a magnificent horse there,
Porthos.”

“Yes,” replied Porthos, “it is the one that ought to have been sent to
me at first. A bad joke of the husband’s substituted the other; but the
husband has been punished since, and I have obtained full satisfaction.”

Planchet and Grimaud appeared in their turn, leading their masters’
steeds. D’Artagnan and Athos put themselves into saddle with their
companions, and all four set forward; Athos upon a horse he owed to a
woman, Aramis on a horse he owed to his mistress, Porthos on a horse he
owed to his procurator’s wife, and d’Artagnan on a horse he owed to his
good fortune--the best mistress possible.

The lackeys followed.

As Porthos had foreseen, the cavalcade produced a good effect; and if
Mme. Coquenard had met Porthos and seen what a superb appearance he made
upon his handsome Spanish genet, she would not have regretted the
bleeding she had inflicted upon the strongbox of her husband.

Near the Louvre the four friends met with M. de Treville, who was
returning from St. Germain; he stopped them to offer his compliments
upon their appointments, which in an instant drew round them a hundred
gapers.

D’Artagnan profited by the circumstance to speak to M. de Treville of
the letter with the great red seal and the cardinal’s arms. It is well
understood that he did not breathe a word about the other.

M de Treville approved of the resolution he had adopted, and assured him
that if on the morrow he did not appear, he himself would undertake to
find him, let him be where he might.

At this moment the clock of La Samaritaine struck six; the four friends
pleaded an engagement, and took leave of M. de Treville.

A short gallop brought them to the road of Chaillot; the day began to
decline, carriages were passing and repassing. D’Artagnan, keeping at
some distance from his friends, darted a scrutinizing glance into every
carriage that appeared, but saw no face with which he was acquainted.

At length, after waiting a quarter of an hour and just as twilight was
beginning to thicken, a carriage appeared, coming at a quick pace on the
road of Sevres. A presentiment instantly told d’Artagnan that this
carriage contained the person who had appointed the rendezvous; the
young man was himself astonished to find his heart beat so violently.
Almost instantly a female head was put out at the window, with two
fingers placed upon her mouth, either to enjoin silence or to send him a
kiss. D’Artagnan uttered a slight cry of joy; this woman, or rather this
apparition--for the carriage passed with the rapidity of a vision--was
Mme. Bonacieux.

By an involuntary movement and in spite of the injunction given,
d’Artagnan put his horse into a gallop, and in a few strides overtook
the carriage; but the window was hermetically closed, the vision had
disappeared.

D’Artagnan then remembered the injunction: “If you value your own life
or that of those who love you, remain motionless, and as if you had seen
nothing.”

He stopped, therefore, trembling not for himself but for the poor woman
who had evidently exposed herself to great danger by appointing this
rendezvous.

The carriage pursued its way, still going at a great pace, till it
dashed into Paris, and disappeared.

D’Artagnan remained fixed to the spot, astounded and not knowing what to
think. If it was Mme. Bonacieux and if she was returning to Paris, why
this fugitive rendezvous, why this simple exchange of a glance, why this
lost kiss? If, on the other side, it was not she--which was still quite
possible--for the little light that remained rendered a mistake
easy--might it not be the commencement of some plot against him through
the allurement of this woman, for whom his love was known?

His three companions joined him. All had plainly seen a woman’s head
appear at the window, but none of them, except Athos, knew Mme.
Bonacieux. The opinion of Athos was that it was indeed she; but less
preoccupied by that pretty face than d’Artagnan, he had fancied he saw a
second head, a man’s head, inside the carriage.

“If that be the case,” said d’Artagnan, “they are doubtless transporting
her from one prison to another. But what can they intend to do with the
poor creature, and how shall I ever meet her again?”

“Friend,” said Athos, gravely, “remember that it is the dead alone with
whom we are not likely to meet again on this earth. You know something
of that, as well as I do, I think. Now, if your mistress is not dead, if
it is she we have just seen, you will meet with her again some day or
other. And perhaps, my God!” added he, with that misanthropic tone which
was peculiar to him, “perhaps sooner than you wish.”

Half past seven had sounded. The carriage had been twenty minutes behind
the time appointed. D’Artagnan’s friends reminded him that he had a
visit to pay, but at the same time bade him observe that there was yet
time to retract.

But d’Artagnan was at the same time impetuous and curious. He had made
up his mind that he would go to the Palais-Cardinal, and that he would
learn what his Eminence had to say to him. Nothing could turn him from
his purpose.

They reached the Rue St. Honore, and in the Place du Palais-Cardinal
they found the twelve invited Musketeers, walking about in expectation
of their comrades. There only they explained to them the matter in hand.

D’Artagnan was well known among the honorable corps of the king’s
Musketeers, in which it was known he would one day take his place; he
was considered beforehand as a comrade. It resulted from these
antecedents that everyone entered heartily into the purpose for which
they met; besides, it would not be unlikely that they would have an
opportunity of playing either the cardinal or his people an ill turn,
and for such expeditions these worthy gentlemen were always ready.

Athos divided them into three groups, assumed the command of one, gave
the second to Aramis, and the third to Porthos; and then each group went
and took their watch near an entrance.

D’Artagnan, on his part, entered boldly at the principal gate.

Although he felt himself ably supported, the young man was not without a
little uneasiness as he ascended the great staircase, step by step. His
conduct toward Milady bore a strong resemblance to treachery, and he was
very suspicious of the political relations which existed between that
woman and the cardinal. Still further, de Wardes, whom he had treated so
ill, was one of the tools of his Eminence; and d’Artagnan knew that
while his Eminence was terrible to his enemies, he was strongly attached
to his friends.

“If de Wardes has related all our affair to the cardinal, which is not
to be doubted, and if he has recognized me, as is probable, I may
consider myself almost as a condemned man,” said d’Artagnan, shaking his
head. “But why has he waited till now? That’s all plain enough. Milady
has laid her complaints against me with that hypocritical grief which
renders her so interesting, and this last offense has made the cup
overflow.”

“Fortunately,” added he, “my good friends are down yonder, and they will
not allow me to be carried away without a struggle. Nevertheless,
Monsieur de Treville’s company of Musketeers alone cannot maintain a war
against the cardinal, who disposes of the forces of all France, and
before whom the queen is without power and the king without will.
D’Artagnan, my friend, you are brave, you are prudent, you have
excellent qualities; but the women will ruin you!”

He came to this melancholy conclusion as he entered the antechamber. He
placed his letter in the hands of the usher on duty, who led him into
the waiting room and passed on into the interior of the palace.

In this waiting room were five or six of the cardinals Guards, who
recognized d’Artagnan, and knowing that it was he who had wounded
Jussac, they looked upon him with a smile of singular meaning.

This smile appeared to d’Artagnan to be of bad augury. Only, as our
Gascon was not easily intimidated--or rather, thanks to a great pride
natural to the men of his country, he did not allow one easily to see
what was passing in his mind when that which was passing at all
resembled fear--he placed himself haughtily in front of Messieurs the
Guards, and waited with his hand on his hip, in an attitude by no means
deficient in majesty.

The usher returned and made a sign to d’Artagnan to follow him. It
appeared to the young man that the Guards, on seeing him depart,
chuckled among themselves.

He traversed a corridor, crossed a grand saloon, entered a library, and
found himself in the presence of a man seated at a desk and writing.

The usher introduced him, and retired without speaking a word.
D’Artagnan remained standing and examined this man.

D’Artagnan at first believed that he had to do with some judge examining
his papers; but he perceived that the man at the desk wrote, or rather
corrected, lines of unequal length, scanning the words on his fingers.
He saw then that he was with a poet. At the end of an instant the poet
closed his manuscript, upon the cover of which was written “Mirame, a
Tragedy in Five Acts,” and raised his head.

D’Artagnan recognized the cardinal.




40 A TERRIBLE VISION


The cardinal leaned his elbow on his manuscript, his cheek upon his
hand, and looked intently at the young man for a moment. No one had a
more searching eye than the Cardinal de Richelieu, and d’Artagnan felt
this glance run through his veins like a fever.

He however kept a good countenance, holding his hat in his hand and
awaiting the good pleasure of his Eminence, without too much assurance,
but also without too much humility.

“Monsieur,” said the cardinal, “are you a d’Artagnan from Bearn?”

“Yes, monseigneur,” replied the young man.

“There are several branches of the d’Artagnans at Tarbes and in its
environs,” said the cardinal; “to which do you belong?”

“I am the son of him who served in the Religious Wars under the great
King Henry, the father of his gracious Majesty.”

“That is well. It is you who set out seven or eight months ago from your
country to seek your fortune in the capital?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“You came through Meung, where something befell you. I don’t very well
know what, but still something.”

“Monseigneur,” said d’Artagnan, “this was what happened to me--”

“Never mind, never mind!” resumed the cardinal, with a smile which
indicated that he knew the story as well as he who wished to relate it.
“You were recommended to Monsieur de Treville, were you not?”

“Yes, monseigneur; but in that unfortunate affair at Meung--”

“The letter was lost,” replied his Eminence; “yes, I know that. But
Monsieur de Treville is a skilled physiognomist, who knows men at first
sight; and he placed you in the company of his brother-in-law, Monsieur
Dessessart, leaving you to hope that one day or other you should enter
the Musketeers.”

“Monseigneur is correctly informed,” said d’Artagnan.

“Since that time many things have happened to you. You were walking one
day behind the Chartreux, when it would have been better if you had been
elsewhere. Then you took with your friends a journey to the waters of
Forges; they stopped on the road, but you continued yours. That is all
very simple: you had business in England.”

“Monseigneur,” said d’Artagnan, quite confused, “I went--”

“Hunting at Windsor, or elsewhere--that concerns nobody. I know, because
it is my office to know everything. On your return you were received by
an august personage, and I perceive with pleasure that you preserve the
souvenir she gave you.”

D’Artagnan placed his hand upon the queen’s diamond, which he wore, and
quickly turned the stone inward; but it was too late.

“The day after that, you received a visit from Cavois,” resumed the
cardinal. “He went to desire you to come to the palace. You have not
returned that visit, and you were wrong.”

“Monseigneur, I feared I had incurred disgrace with your Eminence.”

“How could that be, monsieur? Could you incur my displeasure by having
followed the orders of your superiors with more intelligence and courage
than another would have done? It is the people who do not obey that I
punish, and not those who, like you, obey--but too well. As a proof,
remember the date of the day on which I had you bidden to come to me,
and seek in your memory for what happened to you that very night.”

That was the very evening when the abduction of Mme. Bonacieux took
place. D’Artagnan trembled; and he likewise recollected that during the
past half hour the poor woman had passed close to him, without doubt
carried away by the same power that had caused her disappearance.

“In short,” continued the cardinal, “as I have heard nothing of you for
some time past, I wished to know what you were doing. Besides, you owe
me some thanks. You must yourself have remarked how much you have been
considered in all the circumstances.”

D’Artagnan bowed with respect.

“That,” continued the cardinal, “arose not only from a feeling of
natural equity, but likewise from a plan I have marked out with respect
to you.”

D’Artagnan became more and more astonished.

“I wished to explain this plan to you on the day you received my first
invitation; but you did not come. Fortunately, nothing is lost by this
delay, and you are now about to hear it. Sit down there, before me,
d’Artagnan; you are gentleman enough not to listen standing.” And the
cardinal pointed with his finger to a chair for the young man, who was
so astonished at what was passing that he awaited a second sign from his
interlocutor before he obeyed.

“You are brave, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” continued his Eminence; “you are
prudent, which is still better. I like men of head and heart. Don’t be
afraid,” said he, smiling. “By men of heart I mean men of courage. But
young as you are, and scarcely entering into the world, you have
powerful enemies; if you do not take great heed, they will destroy you.”

“Alas, monseigneur!” replied the young man, “very easily, no doubt, for
they are strong and well supported, while I am alone.”

“Yes, that’s true; but alone as you are, you have done much already, and
will do still more, I don’t doubt. Yet you have need, I believe, to be
guided in the adventurous career you have undertaken; for, if I mistake
not, you came to Paris with the ambitious idea of making your fortune.”

“I am at the age of extravagant hopes, monseigneur,” said d’Artagnan.

“There are no extravagant hopes but for fools, monsieur, and you are a
man of understanding. Now, what would you say to an ensign’s commission
in my Guards, and a company after the campaign?”

“Ah, monseigneur.”

“You accept it, do you not?”

“Monseigneur,” replied d’Artagnan, with an embarrassed air.

“How? You refuse?” cried the cardinal, with astonishment.

“I am in his Majesty’s Guards, monseigneur, and I have no reason to be
dissatisfied.”

“But it appears to me that my Guards--mine--are also his Majesty’s
Guards; and whoever serves in a French corps serves the king.”

“Monseigneur, your Eminence has ill understood my words.”

“You want a pretext, do you not? I comprehend. Well, you have this
excuse: advancement, the opening campaign, the opportunity which I offer
you--so much for the world. As regards yourself, the need of protection;
for it is fit you should know, Monsieur d’Artagnan, that I have received
heavy and serious complaints against you. You do not consecrate your
days and nights wholly to the king’s service.”

D’Artagnan colored.

“In fact,” said the cardinal, placing his hand upon a bundle of papers,
“I have here a whole pile which concerns you. I know you to be a man of
resolution; and your services, well directed, instead of leading you to
ill, might be very advantageous to you. Come; reflect, and decide.”

“Your goodness confounds me, monseigneur,” replied d’Artagnan, “and I am
conscious of a greatness of soul in your Eminence that makes me mean as
an earthworm; but since Monseigneur permits me to speak freely--”

D’Artagnan paused.

“Yes; speak.”

“Then, I will presume to say that all my friends are in the king’s
Musketeers and Guards, and that by an inconceivable fatality my enemies
are in the service of your Eminence; I should, therefore, be ill
received here and ill regarded there if I accepted what Monseigneur
offers me.”

“Do you happen to entertain the haughty idea that I have not yet made
you an offer equal to your value?” asked the cardinal, with a smile of
disdain.

“Monseigneur, your Eminence is a hundred times too kind to me; and on
the contrary, I think I have not proved myself worthy of your goodness.
The siege of La Rochelle is about to be resumed, monseigneur. I shall
serve under the eye of your Eminence, and if I have the good fortune to
conduct myself at the siege in such a manner as merits your attention,
then I shall at least leave behind me some brilliant action to justify
the protection with which you honor me. Everything is best in its time,
monseigneur. Hereafter, perhaps, I shall have the right of giving
myself; at present I shall appear to sell myself.”

“That is to say, you refuse to serve me, monsieur,” said the cardinal,
with a tone of vexation, through which, however, might be seen a sort of
esteem; “remain free, then, and guard your hatreds and your sympathies.”

“Monseigneur--”

“Well, well,” said the cardinal, “I don’t wish you any ill; but you must
be aware that it is quite trouble enough to defend and recompense our
friends. We owe nothing to our enemies; and let me give you a piece of
advice; take care of yourself, Monsieur d’Artagnan, for from the moment
I withdraw my hand from behind you, I would not give an obolus for your
life.”

“I will try to do so, monseigneur,” replied the Gascon, with a noble
confidence.

“Remember at a later period and at a certain moment, if any mischance
should happen to you,” said Richelieu, significantly, “that it was I who
came to seek you, and that I did all in my power to prevent this
misfortune befalling you.”

“I shall entertain, whatever may happen,” said d’Artagnan, placing his
hand upon his breast and bowing, “an eternal gratitude toward your
Eminence for that which you now do for me.”

“Well, let it be, then, as you have said, Monsieur d’Artagnan; we shall
see each other again after the campaign. I will have my eye upon you,
for I shall be there,” replied the cardinal, pointing with his finger to
a magnificent suit of armor he was to wear, “and on our return, well--we
will settle our account!”

“Young man,” said Richelieu, “if I shall be able to say to you at
another time what I have said to you today, I promise you to do so.”

This last expression of Richelieu’s conveyed a terrible doubt; it
alarmed d’Artagnan more than a menace would have done, for it was a
warning. The cardinal, then, was seeking to preserve him from some
misfortune which threatened him. He opened his mouth to reply, but with
a haughty gesture the cardinal dismissed him.

D’Artagnan went out, but at the door his heart almost failed him, and he
felt inclined to return. Then the noble and severe countenance of Athos
crossed his mind; if he made the compact with the cardinal which he
required, Athos would no more give him his hand--Athos would renounce
him.

It was this fear that restrained him, so powerful is the influence of a
truly great character on all that surrounds it.

D’Artagnan descended by the staircase at which he had entered, and found
Athos and the four Musketeers waiting his appearance, and beginning to
grow uneasy. With a word, d’Artagnan reassured them; and Planchet ran to
inform the other sentinels that it was useless to keep guard longer, as
his master had come out safe from the Palais-Cardinal.

Returned home with Athos, Aramis and Porthos inquired eagerly the cause
of the strange interview; but d’Artagnan confined himself to telling
them that M. de Richelieu had sent for him to propose to him to enter
into his guards with the rank of ensign, and that he had refused.

“And you were right,” cried Aramis and Porthos, with one voice.

Athos fell into a profound reverie and answered nothing. But when they
were alone he said, “You have done that which you ought to have done,
d’Artagnan; but perhaps you have been wrong.”

D’Artagnan sighed deeply, for this voice responded to a secret voice of
his soul, which told him that great misfortunes awaited him.

The whole of the next day was spent in preparations for departure.
D’Artagnan went to take leave of M. de Treville. At that time it was
believed that the separation of the Musketeers and the Guards would be
but momentary, the king holding his Parliament that very day and
proposing to set out the day after. M. de Treville contented himself
with asking d’Artagnan if he could do anything for him, but d’Artagnan
answered that he was supplied with all he wanted.

That night brought together all those comrades of the Guards of M.
Dessessart and the company of Musketeers of M. de Treville who had been
accustomed to associate together. They were parting to meet again when
it pleased God, and if it pleased God. That night, then, was somewhat
riotous, as may be imagined. In such cases extreme preoccupation is only
to be combated by extreme carelessness.

At the first sound of the morning trumpet the friends separated; the
Musketeers hastening to the hotel of M. de Treville, the Guards to that
of M. Dessessart. Each of the captains then led his company to the
Louvre, where the king held his review.

The king was dull and appeared ill, which detracted a little from his
usual lofty bearing. In fact, the evening before, a fever had seized him
in the midst of the Parliament, while he was holding his Bed of Justice.
He had, not the less, decided upon setting out that same evening; and in
spite of the remonstrances that had been offered to him, he persisted in
having the review, hoping by setting it at defiance to conquer the
disease which began to lay hold upon him.

The review over, the Guards set forward alone on their march, the
Musketeers waiting for the king, which allowed Porthos time to go and
take a turn in his superb equipment in the Rue aux Ours.

The procurator’s wife saw him pass in his new uniform and on his fine
horse. She loved Porthos too dearly to allow him to part thus; she made
him a sign to dismount and come to her. Porthos was magnificent; his
spurs jingled, his cuirass glittered, his sword knocked proudly against
his ample limbs. This time the clerks evinced no inclination to laugh,
such a real ear clipper did Porthos appear.

The Musketeer was introduced to M. Coquenard, whose little gray eyes
sparkled with anger at seeing his cousin all blazing new. Nevertheless,
one thing afforded him inward consolation; it was expected by everybody
that the campaign would be a severe one. He whispered a hope to himself
that this beloved relative might be killed in the field.

Porthos paid his compliments to M. Coquenard and bade him farewell. M.
Coquenard wished him all sorts of prosperities. As to Mme. Coquenard,
she could not restrain her tears; but no evil impressions were taken
from her grief as she was known to be very much attached to her
relatives, about whom she was constantly having serious disputes with
her husband.

But the real adieux were made in Mme. Coquenard’s chamber; they were
heartrending.

As long as the procurator’s wife could follow him with her eyes, she
waved her handkerchief to him, leaning so far out of the window as to
lead people to believe she wished to precipitate herself. Porthos
received all these attentions like a man accustomed to such
demonstrations, only on turning the corner of the street he lifted his
hat gracefully, and waved it to her as a sign of adieu.

On his part Aramis wrote a long letter. To whom? Nobody knew. Kitty, who
was to set out that evening for Tours, was waiting in the next chamber.

Athos sipped the last bottle of his Spanish wine.

In the meantime d’Artagnan was defiling with his company. Arriving at
the Faubourg St. Antoine, he turned round to look gaily at the Bastille;
but as it was the Bastille alone he looked at, he did not observe
Milady, who, mounted upon a light chestnut horse, designated him with
her finger to two ill-looking men who came close up to the ranks to take
notice of him. To a look of interrogation which they made, Milady
replied by a sign that it was he. Then, certain that there could be no
mistake in the execution of her orders, she started her horse and
disappeared.

The two men followed the company, and on leaving the Faubourg St.
Antoine, mounted two horses properly equipped, which a servant without
livery had waiting for them.




41 THE SEIGE OF LA ROCHELLE


The Siege of La Rochelle was one of the great political events of the
reign of Louis XIII, and one of the great military enterprises of the
cardinal. It is, then, interesting and even necessary that we should say
a few words about it, particularly as many details of this siege are
connected in too important a manner with the story we have undertaken to
relate to allow us to pass it over in silence.

The political plans of the cardinal when he undertook this siege were
extensive. Let us unfold them first, and then pass on to the private
plans which perhaps had not less influence upon his Eminence than the
others.

Of the important cities given up by Henry IV to the Huguenots as places
of safety, there only remained La Rochelle. It became necessary,
therefore, to destroy this last bulwark of Calvinism--a dangerous leaven
with which the ferments of civil revolt and foreign war were constantly
mingling.

Spaniards, Englishmen, and Italian malcontents, adventurers of all
nations, and soldiers of fortune of every sect, flocked at the first
summons under the standard of the Protestants, and organized themselves
like a vast association, whose branches diverged freely over all parts
of Europe.

La Rochelle, which had derived a new importance from the ruin of the
other Calvinist cities, was, then, the focus of dissensions and
ambition. Moreover, its port was the last in the kingdom of France open
to the English, and by closing it against England, our eternal enemy,
the cardinal completed the work of Joan of Arc and the Duc de Guise.

Thus Bassompierre, who was at once Protestant and Catholic--Protestant
by conviction and Catholic as commander of the order of the Holy Ghost;
Bassompierre, who was a German by birth and a Frenchman at heart--in
short, Bassompierre, who had a distinguished command at the siege of La
Rochelle, said, in charging at the head of several other Protestant
nobles like himself, “You will see, gentlemen, that we shall be fools
enough to take La Rochelle.”

And Bassompierre was right. The cannonade of the Isle of Re presaged to
him the dragonnades of the Cevennes; the taking of La Rochelle was the
preface to the revocation of the Edict of Nantes.

We have hinted that by the side of these views of the leveling and
simplifying minister, which belong to history, the chronicler is forced
to recognize the lesser motives of the amorous man and jealous rival.

Richelieu, as everyone knows, had loved the queen. Was this love a
simple political affair, or was it naturally one of those profound
passions which Anne of Austria inspired in those who approached her?
That we are not able to say; but at all events, we have seen, by the
anterior developments of this story, that Buckingham had the advantage
over him, and in two or three circumstances, particularly that of the
diamond studs, had, thanks to the devotedness of the three Musketeers
and the courage and conduct of d’Artagnan, cruelly mystified him.

It was, then, Richelieu’s object, not only to get rid of an enemy of
France, but to avenge himself on a rival; but this vengeance must be
grand and striking and worthy in every way of a man who held in his
hand, as his weapon for combat, the forces of a kingdom.

Richelieu knew that in combating England he combated Buckingham; that in
triumphing over England he triumphed over Buckingham--in short, that in
humiliating England in the eyes of Europe he humiliated Buckingham in
the eyes of the queen.

On his side Buckingham, in pretending to maintain the honor of England,
was moved by interests exactly like those of the cardinal. Buckingham
also was pursuing a private vengeance. Buckingham could not under any
pretense be admitted into France as an ambassador; he wished to enter it
as a conqueror.

It resulted from this that the real stake in this game, which two most
powerful kingdoms played for the good pleasure of two amorous men, was
simply a kind look from Anne of Austria.

The first advantage had been gained by Buckingham. Arriving unexpectedly
in sight of the Isle of Re with ninety vessels and nearly twenty
thousand men, he had surprised the Comte de Toiras, who commanded for
the king in the Isle, and he had, after a bloody conflict, effected his
landing.

Allow us to observe in passing that in this fight perished the Baron de
Chantal; that the Baron de Chantal left a little orphan girl eighteen
months old, and that this little girl was afterward Mme. de Sevigne.

The Comte de Toiras retired into the citadel St. Martin with his
garrison, and threw a hundred men into a little fort called the fort of
La Pree.

This event had hastened the resolutions of the cardinal; and till the
king and he could take the command of the siege of La Rochelle, which
was determined, he had sent Monsieur to direct the first operations, and
had ordered all the troops he could dispose of to march toward the
theater of war. It was of this detachment, sent as a vanguard, that our
friend d’Artagnan formed a part.

The king, as we have said, was to follow as soon as his Bed of Justice
had been held; but on rising from his Bed of Justice on the
twenty-eighth of June, he felt himself attacked by fever. He was,
notwithstanding, anxious to set out; but his illness becoming more
serious, he was forced to stop at Villeroy.

Now, whenever the king halted, the Musketeers halted. It followed that
d’Artagnan, who was as yet purely and simply in the Guards, found
himself, for the time at least, separated from his good friends--Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis. This separation, which was no more than an
unpleasant circumstance, would have certainly become a cause of serious
uneasiness if he had been able to guess by what unknown dangers he was
surrounded.

He, however, arrived without accident in the camp established before La
Rochelle, on the tenth of the month of September of the year 1627.

Everything was in the same state. The Duke of Buckingham and his
English, masters of the Isle of Re, continued to besiege, but without
success, the citadel St. Martin and the fort of La Pree; and hostilities
with La Rochelle had commenced, two or three days before, about a fort
which the Duc d’Angouleme had caused to be constructed near the city.

The Guards, under the command of M. Dessessart, took up their quarters
at the Minimes; but, as we know, d’Artagnan, possessed with ambition to
enter the Musketeers, had formed but few friendships among his comrades,
and he felt himself isolated and given up to his own reflections.

His reflections were not very cheerful. From the time of his arrival in
Paris, he had been mixed up with public affairs; but his own private
affairs had made no great progress, either in love or fortune. As to
love, the only woman he could have loved was Mme. Bonacieux; and Mme.
Bonacieux had disappeared, without his being able to discover what had
become of her. As to fortune, he had made--he, humble as he was--an
enemy of the cardinal; that is to say, of a man before whom trembled the
greatest men of the kingdom, beginning with the king.

That man had the power to crush him, and yet he had not done so. For a
mind so perspicuous as that of d’Artagnan, this indulgence was a light
by which he caught a glimpse of a better future.

Then he had made himself another enemy, less to be feared, he thought;
but nevertheless, he instinctively felt, not to be despised. This enemy
was Milady.

In exchange for all this, he had acquired the protection and good will
of the queen; but the favor of the queen was at the present time an
additional cause of persecution, and her protection, as it was known,
protected badly--as witness Chalais and Mme. Bonacieux.

What he had clearly gained in all this was the diamond, worth five or
six thousand livres, which he wore on his finger; and even this
diamond--supposing that d’Artagnan, in his projects of ambition, wished
to keep it, to make it someday a pledge for the gratitude of the
queen--had not in the meanwhile, since he could not part with it, more
value than the gravel he trod under his feet.

We say the gravel he trod under his feet, for d’Artagnan made these
reflections while walking solitarily along a pretty little road which
led from the camp to the village of Angoutin. Now, these reflections had
led him further than he intended, and the day was beginning to decline
when, by the last ray of the setting sun, he thought he saw the barrel
of a musket glitter from behind a hedge.

D’Artagnan had a quick eye and a prompt understanding. He comprehended
that the musket had not come there of itself, and that he who bore it
had not concealed himself behind a hedge with any friendly intentions.
He determined, therefore, to direct his course as clear from it as he
could when, on the opposite side of the road, from behind a rock, he
perceived the extremity of another musket.

This was evidently an ambuscade.

The young man cast a glance at the first musket and saw, with a certain
degree of inquietude, that it was leveled in his direction; but as soon
as he perceived that the orifice of the barrel was motionless, he threw
himself upon the ground. At the same instant the gun was fired, and he
heard the whistling of a ball pass over his head.

No time was to be lost. D’Artagnan sprang up with a bound, and at the
same instant the ball from the other musket tore up the gravel on the
very spot on the road where he had thrown himself with his face to the
ground.

D’Artagnan was not one of those foolhardy men who seek a ridiculous
death in order that it may be said of them that they did not retreat a
single step. Besides, courage was out of the question here; d’Artagnan
had fallen into an ambush.

“If there is a third shot,” said he to himself, “I am a lost man.”

He immediately, therefore, took to his heels and ran toward the camp,
with the swiftness of the young men of his country, so renowned for
their agility; but whatever might be his speed, the first who fired,
having had time to reload, fired a second shot, and this time so well
aimed that it struck his hat, and carried it ten paces from him.

As he, however, had no other hat, he picked up this as he ran, and
arrived at his quarters very pale and quite out of breath. He sat down
without saying a word to anybody, and began to reflect.

This event might have three causes:

The first and the most natural was that it might be an ambuscade of the
Rochellais, who might not be sorry to kill one of his Majesty’s Guards,
because it would be an enemy the less, and this enemy might have a
well-furnished purse in his pocket.

D’Artagnan took his hat, examined the hole made by the ball, and shook
his head. The ball was not a musket ball--it was an arquebus ball. The
accuracy of the aim had first given him the idea that a special weapon
had been employed. This could not, then, be a military ambuscade, as the
ball was not of the regular caliber.

This might be a kind remembrance of Monsieur the Cardinal. It may be
observed that at the very moment when, thanks to the ray of the sun, he
perceived the gun barrel, he was thinking with astonishment on the
forbearance of his Eminence with respect to him.

But d’Artagnan again shook his head. For people toward whom he had but
to put forth his hand, his Eminence had rarely recourse to such means.

It might be a vengeance of Milady; that was most probable.

He tried in vain to remember the faces or dress of the assassins; he had
escaped so rapidly that he had not had leisure to notice anything.

“Ah, my poor friends!” murmured d’Artagnan; “where are you? And that you
should fail me!”

D’Artagnan passed a very bad night. Three or four times he started up,
imagining that a man was approaching his bed for the purpose of stabbing
him. Nevertheless, day dawned without darkness having brought any
accident.

But d’Artagnan well suspected that that which was deferred was not
relinquished.

D’Artagnan remained all day in his quarters, assigning as a reason to
himself that the weather was bad.

At nine o’clock the next morning, the drums beat to arms. The Duc
d’Orleans visited the posts. The guards were under arms, and d’Artagnan
took his place in the midst of his comrades.

Monsieur passed along the front of the line; then all the superior
officers approached him to pay their compliments, M. Dessessart, captain
of the Guards, as well as the others.

At the expiration of a minute or two, it appeared to d’Artagnan that M.
Dessessart made him a sign to approach. He waited for a fresh gesture on
the part of his superior, for fear he might be mistaken; but this
gesture being repeated, he left the ranks, and advanced to receive
orders.

“Monsieur is about to ask for some men of good will for a dangerous
mission, but one which will do honor to those who shall accomplish it;
and I made you a sign in order that you might hold yourself in
readiness.”

“Thanks, my captain!” replied d’Artagnan, who wished for nothing better
than an opportunity to distinguish himself under the eye of the
lieutenant general.

In fact the Rochellais had made a sortie during the night, and had
retaken a bastion of which the royal army had gained possession two days
before. The matter was to ascertain, by reconnoitering, how the enemy
guarded this bastion.

At the end of a few minutes Monsieur raised his voice, and said, “I want
for this mission three or four volunteers, led by a man who can be
depended upon.”

“As to the man to be depended upon, I have him under my hand, monsieur,”
said M. Dessessart, pointing to d’Artagnan; “and as to the four or five
volunteers, Monsieur has but to make his intentions known, and the men
will not be wanting.”

“Four men of good will who will risk being killed with me!” said
d’Artagnan, raising his sword.

Two of his comrades of the Guards immediately sprang forward, and two
other soldiers having joined them, the number was deemed sufficient.
D’Artagnan declined all others, being unwilling to take the first chance
from those who had the priority.

It was not known whether, after the taking of the bastion, the
Rochellais had evacuated it or left a garrison in it; the object then
was to examine the place near enough to verify the reports.

D’Artagnan set out with his four companions, and followed the trench;
the two Guards marched abreast with him, and the two soldiers followed
behind.

They arrived thus, screened by the lining of the trench, till they came
within a hundred paces of the bastion. There, on turning round,
d’Artagnan perceived that the two soldiers had disappeared.

He thought that, beginning to be afraid, they had stayed behind, and he
continued to advance.

At the turning of the counterscarp they found themselves within about
sixty paces of the bastion. They saw no one, and the bastion seemed
abandoned.

The three composing our forlorn hope were deliberating whether they
should proceed any further, when all at once a circle of smoke enveloped
the giant of stone, and a dozen balls came whistling around d’Artagnan
and his companions.

They knew all they wished to know; the bastion was guarded. A longer
stay in this dangerous spot would have been useless imprudence.
D’Artagnan and his two companions turned their backs, and commenced a
retreat which resembled a flight.

On arriving at the angle of the trench which was to serve them as a
rampart, one of the Guardsmen fell. A ball had passed through his
breast. The other, who was safe and sound, continued his way toward the
camp.

D’Artagnan was not willing to abandon his companion thus, and stooped to
raise him and assist him in regaining the lines; but at this moment two
shots were fired. One ball struck the head of the already-wounded guard,
and the other flattened itself against a rock, after having passed
within two inches of d’Artagnan.

The young man turned quickly round, for this attack could not have come
from the bastion, which was hidden by the angle of the trench. The idea
of the two soldiers who had abandoned him occurred to his mind, and with
them he remembered the assassins of two evenings before. He resolved
this time to know with whom he had to deal, and fell upon the body of
his comrade as if he were dead.

He quickly saw two heads appear above an abandoned work within thirty
paces of him; they were the heads of the two soldiers. D’Artagnan had
not been deceived; these two men had only followed for the purpose of
assassinating him, hoping that the young man’s death would be placed to
the account of the enemy.

As he might be only wounded and might denounce their crime, they came up
to him with the purpose of making sure. Fortunately, deceived by
d’Artagnan’s trick, they neglected to reload their guns.

When they were within ten paces of him, d’Artagnan, who in falling had
taken care not to let go his sword, sprang up close to them.

The assassins comprehended that if they fled toward the camp without
having killed their man, they should be accused by him; therefore their
first idea was to join the enemy. One of them took his gun by the
barrel, and used it as he would a club. He aimed a terrible blow at
d’Artagnan, who avoided it by springing to one side; but by this
movement he left a passage free to the bandit, who darted off toward the
bastion. As the Rochellais who guarded the bastion were ignorant of the
intentions of the man they saw coming toward them, they fired upon him,
and he fell, struck by a ball which broke his shoulder.

Meantime d’Artagnan had thrown himself upon the other soldier, attacking
him with his sword. The conflict was not long; the wretch had nothing to
defend himself with but his discharged arquebus. The sword of the
Guardsman slipped along the barrel of the now-useless weapon, and passed
through the thigh of the assassin, who fell.

D’Artagnan immediately placed the point of his sword at his throat.

“Oh, do not kill me!” cried the bandit. “Pardon, pardon, my officer, and
I will tell you all.”

“Is your secret of enough importance to me to spare your life for it?”
asked the young man, withholding his arm.

“Yes; if you think existence worth anything to a man of twenty, as you
are, and who may hope for everything, being handsome and brave, as you
are.”

“Wretch,” cried d’Artagnan, “speak quickly! Who employed you to
assassinate me?”

“A woman whom I don’t know, but who is called Milady.”

“But if you don’t know this woman, how do you know her name?”

“My comrade knows her, and called her so. It was with him she agreed,
and not with me; he even has in his pocket a letter from that person,
who attaches great importance to you, as I have heard him say.”

“But how did you become concerned in this villainous affair?”

“He proposed to me to undertake it with him, and I agreed.”

“And how much did she give you for this fine enterprise?”

“A hundred louis.”

“Well, come!” said the young man, laughing, “she thinks I am worth
something. A hundred louis? Well, that was a temptation for two wretches
like you. I understand why you accepted it, and I grant you my pardon;
but upon one condition.”

“What is that?” said the soldier, uneasy at perceiving that all was not
over.

“That you will go and fetch me the letter your comrade has in his
pocket.”

“But,” cried the bandit, “that is only another way of killing me. How
can I go and fetch that letter under the fire of the bastion?”

“You must nevertheless make up your mind to go and get it, or I swear
you shall die by my hand.”

“Pardon, monsieur; pity! In the name of that young lady you love, and
whom you perhaps believe dead but who is not!” cried the bandit,
throwing himself upon his knees and leaning upon his hand--for he began
to lose his strength with his blood.

“And how do you know there is a young woman whom I love, and that I
believed that woman dead?” asked d’Artagnan.

“By that letter which my comrade has in his pocket.”

“You see, then,” said d’Artagnan, “that I must have that letter. So no
more delay, no more hesitation; or else whatever may be my repugnance to
soiling my sword a second time with the blood of a wretch like you, I
swear by my faith as an honest man--” and at these words d’Artagnan made
so fierce a gesture that the wounded man sprang up.

“Stop, stop!” cried he, regaining strength by force of terror. “I will
go--I will go!”

D’Artagnan took the soldier’s arquebus, made him go on before him, and
urged him toward his companion by pricking him behind with his sword.

It was a frightful thing to see this wretch, leaving a long track of
blood on the ground he passed over, pale with approaching death, trying
to drag himself along without being seen to the body of his accomplice,
which lay twenty paces from him.

Terror was so strongly painted on his face, covered with a cold sweat,
that d’Artagnan took pity on him, and casting upon him a look of
contempt, “Stop,” said he, “I will show you the difference between a man
of courage and such a coward as you. Stay where you are; I will go
myself.”

And with a light step, an eye on the watch, observing the movements of
the enemy and taking advantage of the accidents of the ground,
d’Artagnan succeeded in reaching the second soldier.

There were two means of gaining his object--to search him on the spot,
or to carry him away, making a buckler of his body, and search him in
the trench.

D’Artagnan preferred the second means, and lifted the assassin onto his
shoulders at the moment the enemy fired.

A slight shock, the dull noise of three balls which penetrated the
flesh, a last cry, a convulsion of agony, proved to d’Artagnan that the
would-be assassin had saved his life.

D’Artagnan regained the trench, and threw the corpse beside the wounded
man, who was as pale as death.

Then he began to search. A leather pocketbook, a purse, in which was
evidently a part of the sum which the bandit had received, with a dice
box and dice, completed the possessions of the dead man.

He left the box and dice where they fell, threw the purse to the wounded
man, and eagerly opened the pocketbook.

Among some unimportant papers he found the following letter, that which
he had sought at the risk of his life:

“Since you have lost sight of that woman and she is now in safety in the
convent, which you should never have allowed her to reach, try, at
least, not to miss the man. If you do, you know that my hand stretches
far, and that you shall pay very dearly for the hundred louis you have
from me.”

No signature. Nevertheless it was plain the letter came from Milady. He
consequently kept it as a piece of evidence, and being in safety behind
the angle of the trench, he began to interrogate the wounded man. He
confessed that he had undertaken with his comrade--the same who was
killed--to carry off a young woman who was to leave Paris by the
Barriere de La Villette; but having stopped to drink at a cabaret, they
had missed the carriage by ten minutes.

“But what were you to do with that woman?” asked d’Artagnan, with
anguish.

“We were to have conveyed her to a hotel in the Place Royale,” said the
wounded man.

“Yes, yes!” murmured d’Artagnan; “that’s the place--Milady’s own
residence!”

Then the young man tremblingly comprehended what a terrible thirst for
vengeance urged this woman on to destroy him, as well as all who loved
him, and how well she must be acquainted with the affairs of the court,
since she had discovered all. There could be no doubt she owed this
information to the cardinal.

But amid all this he perceived, with a feeling of real joy, that the
queen must have discovered the prison in which poor Mme. Bonacieux was
explaining her devotion, and that she had freed her from that prison;
and the letter he had received from the young woman, and her passage
along the road of Chaillot like an apparition, were now explained.

Then also, as Athos had predicted, it became possible to find Mme.
Bonacieux, and a convent was not impregnable.

This idea completely restored clemency to his heart. He turned toward
the wounded man, who had watched with intense anxiety all the various
expressions of his countenance, and holding out his arm to him, said,
“Come, I will not abandon you thus. Lean upon me, and let us return to
the camp.”

“Yes,” said the man, who could scarcely believe in such magnanimity,
“but is it not to have me hanged?”

“You have my word,” said he; “for the second time I give you your life.”

The wounded man sank upon his knees, to again kiss the feet of his
preserver; but d’Artagnan, who had no longer a motive for staying so
near the enemy, abridged the testimonials of his gratitude.

The Guardsman who had returned at the first discharge announced the
death of his four companions. They were therefore much astonished and
delighted in the regiment when they saw the young man come back safe and
sound.

D’Artagnan explained the sword wound of his companion by a sortie which
he improvised. He described the death of the other soldier, and the
perils they had encountered. This recital was for him the occasion of
veritable triumph. The whole army talked of this expedition for a day,
and Monsieur paid him his compliments upon it. Besides this, as every
great action bears its recompense with it, the brave exploit of
d’Artagnan resulted in the restoration of the tranquility he had lost.
In fact, d’Artagnan believed that he might be tranquil, as one of his
two enemies was killed and the other devoted to his interests.

This tranquillity proved one thing--that d’Artagnan did not yet know
Milady.




42 THE ANJOU WINE


After the most disheartening news of the king’s health, a report of his
convalescence began to prevail in the camp; and as he was very anxious
to be in person at the siege, it was said that as soon as he could mount
a horse he would set forward.

Meantime, Monsieur, who knew that from one day to the other he might
expect to be removed from his command by the Duc d’Angouleme, by
Bassompierre, or by Schomberg, who were all eager for his post, did but
little, lost his days in wavering, and did not dare to attempt any great
enterprise to drive the English from the Isle of Re, where they still
besieged the citadel St. Martin and the fort of La Pree, as on their
side the French were besieging La Rochelle.

D’Artagnan, as we have said, had become more tranquil, as always happens
after a past danger, particularly when the danger seems to have
vanished. He only felt one uneasiness, and that was at not hearing any
tidings from his friends.

But one morning at the commencement of the month of November everything
was explained to him by this letter, dated from Villeroy:

M d’Artagnan,

MM Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, after having had an entertainment at my
house and enjoying themselves very much, created such a disturbance that
the provost of the castle, a rigid man, has ordered them to be confined
for some days; but I accomplish the order they have given me by
forwarding to you a dozen bottles of my Anjou wine, with which they are
much pleased. They are desirous that you should drink to their health in
their favorite wine. I have done this, and am, monsieur, with great
respect,

Your very humble and obedient servant,

Godeau, Purveyor of the Musketeers

“That’s all well!” cried d’Artagnan. “They think of me in their
pleasures, as I thought of them in my troubles. Well, I will certainly
drink to their health with all my heart, but I will not drink alone.”

And d’Artagnan went among those Guardsmen with whom he had formed
greater intimacy than with the others, to invite them to enjoy with him
this present of delicious Anjou wine which had been sent him from
Villeroy.

One of the two Guardsmen was engaged that evening, and another the next,
so the meeting was fixed for the day after that.

D’Artagnan, on his return, sent the twelve bottles of wine to the
refreshment room of the Guards, with strict orders that great care
should be taken of it; and then, on the day appointed, as the dinner was
fixed for midday d’Artagnan sent Planchet at nine in the morning to
assist in preparing everything for the entertainment.

Planchet, very proud of being raised to the dignity of landlord, thought
he would make all ready, like an intelligent man; and with this view
called in the assistance of the lackey of one of his master’s guests,
named Fourreau, and the false soldier who had tried to kill d’Artagnan
and who, belonging to no corps, had entered into the service of
d’Artagnan, or rather of Planchet, after d’Artagnan had saved his life.

The hour of the banquet being come, the two guards arrived, took their
places, and the dishes were arranged on the table. Planchet waited,
towel on arm; Fourreau uncorked the bottles; and Brisemont, which was
the name of the convalescent, poured the wine, which was a little shaken
by its journey, carefully into decanters. Of this wine, the first bottle
being a little thick at the bottom, Brisemont poured the lees into a
glass, and d’Artagnan desired him to drink it, for the poor devil had
not yet recovered his strength.

The guests having eaten the soup, were about to lift the first glass of
wine to their lips, when all at once the cannon sounded from Fort Louis
and Fort Neuf. The Guardsmen, imagining this to be caused by some
unexpected attack, either of the besieged or the English, sprang to
their swords. D’Artagnan, not less forward than they, did likewise, and
all ran out, in order to repair to their posts.

But scarcely were they out of the room before they were made aware of
the cause of this noise. Cries of “Live the king! Live the cardinal!”
resounded on every side, and the drums were beaten in all directions.

In short, the king, impatient, as has been said, had come by forced
marches, and had that moment arrived with all his household and a
reinforcement of ten thousand troops. His Musketeers proceeded and
followed him. D’Artagnan, placed in line with his company, saluted with
an expressive gesture his three friends, whose eyes soon discovered him,
and M. de Treville, who detected him at once.

The ceremony of reception over, the four friends were soon in one
another’s arms.

“Pardieu!” cried d’Artagnan, “you could not have arrived in better time;
the dinner cannot have had time to get cold! Can it, gentlemen?” added
the young man, turning to the two Guards, whom he introduced to his
friends.

“Ah, ah!” said Porthos, “it appears we are feasting!”

“I hope,” said Aramis, “there are no women at your dinner.”

“Is there any drinkable wine in your tavern?” asked Athos.

“Well, pardieu! there is yours, my dear friend,” replied d’Artagnan.

“Our wine!” said Athos, astonished.

“Yes, that you sent me.”

“We sent you wine?”

“You know very well--the wine from the hills of Anjou.”

“Yes, I know what brand you are talking about.”

“The wine you prefer.”

“Well, in the absence of champagne and chambertin, you must content
yourselves with that.”

“And so, connoisseurs in wine as we are, we have sent you some Anjou
wine?” said Porthos.

“Not exactly, it is the wine that was sent by your order.”

“On our account?” said the three Musketeers.

“Did you send this wine, Aramis?” said Athos.

“No; and you, Porthos?”

“No; and you, Athos?”

“No!”

“If it was not you, it was your purveyor,” said d’Artagnan.

“Our purveyor!”

“Yes, your purveyor, Godeau--the purveyor of the Musketeers.”

“My faith! never mind where it comes from,” said Porthos, “let us taste
it, and if it is good, let us drink it.”

“No,” said Athos; “don’t let us drink wine which comes from an unknown
source.”

“You are right, Athos,” said d’Artagnan. “Did none of you charge your
purveyor, Godeau, to send me some wine?”

“No! And yet you say he has sent you some as from us?”

“Here is his letter,” said d’Artagnan, and he presented the note to his
comrades.

“This is not his writing!” said Athos. “I am acquainted with it; before
we left Villeroy I settled the accounts of the regiment.”

“A false letter altogether,” said Porthos, “we have not been
disciplined.”

“d’Artagnan,” said Aramis, in a reproachful tone, “how could you believe
that we had made a disturbance?”

D’Artagnan grew pale, and a convulsive trembling shook all his limbs.

“Thou alarmest me!” said Athos, who never used thee and thou but upon
very particular occasions, “what has happened?”

“Look you, my friends!” cried d’Artagnan, “a horrible suspicion crosses
my mind! Can this be another vengeance of that woman?”

It was now Athos who turned pale.

D’Artagnan rushed toward the refreshment room, the three Musketeers and
the two Guards following him.

The first object that met the eyes of d’Artagnan on entering the room
was Brisemont, stretched upon the ground and rolling in horrible
convulsions.

Planchet and Fourreau, as pale as death, were trying to give him succor;
but it was plain that all assistance was useless--all the features of
the dying man were distorted with agony.

“Ah!” cried he, on perceiving d’Artagnan, “ah! this is frightful! You
pretend to pardon me, and you poison me!”

“I!” cried d’Artagnan. “I, wretch? What do you say?”

“I say that it was you who gave me the wine; I say that it was you who
desired me to drink it. I say you wished to avenge yourself on me, and I
say that it is horrible!”

“Do not think so, Brisemont,” said d’Artagnan; “do not think so. I swear
to you, I protest--”

“Oh, but God is above! God will punish you! My God, grant that he may
one day suffer what I suffer!”

“Upon the Gospel,” said d’Artagnan, throwing himself down by the dying
man, “I swear to you that the wine was poisoned and that I was going to
drink of it as you did.”

“I do not believe you,” cried the soldier, and he expired amid horrible
tortures.

“Frightful! frightful!” murmured Athos, while Porthos broke the bottles
and Aramis gave orders, a little too late, that a confessor should be
sent for.

“Oh, my friends,” said d’Artagnan, “you come once more to save my life,
not only mine but that of these gentlemen. Gentlemen,” continued he,
addressing the Guardsmen, “I request you will be silent with regard to
this adventure. Great personages may have had a hand in what you have
seen, and if talked about, the evil would only recoil upon us.”

“Ah, monsieur!” stammered Planchet, more dead than alive, “ah, monsieur,
what an escape I have had!”

“How, sirrah! you were going to drink my wine?”

“To the health of the king, monsieur; I was going to drink a small glass
of it if Fourreau had not told me I was called.”

“Alas!” said Fourreau, whose teeth chattered with terror, “I wanted to
get him out of the way that I might drink myself.”

“Gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, addressing the Guardsmen, “you may easily
comprehend that such a feast can only be very dull after what has taken
place; so accept my excuses, and put off the party till another day, I
beg of you.”

The two Guardsmen courteously accepted d’Artagnan’s excuses, and
perceiving that the four friends desired to be alone, retired.

When the young Guardsman and the three Musketeers were without
witnesses, they looked at one another with an air which plainly
expressed that each of them perceived the gravity of their situation.

“In the first place,” said Athos, “let us leave this chamber; the dead
are not agreeable company, particularly when they have died a violent
death.”

“Planchet,” said d’Artagnan, “I commit the corpse of this poor devil to
your care. Let him be interred in holy ground. He committed a crime, it
is true; but he repented of it.”

And the four friends quit the room, leaving to Planchet and Fourreau the
duty of paying mortuary honors to Brisemont.

The host gave them another chamber, and served them with fresh eggs and
some water, which Athos went himself to draw at the fountain. In a few
words, Porthos and Aramis were posted as to the situation.

“Well,” said d’Artagnan to Athos, “you see, my dear friend, that this is
war to the death.”

Athos shook his head.

“Yes, yes,” replied he, “I perceive that plainly; but do you really
believe it is she?”

“I am sure of it.”

“Nevertheless, I confess I still doubt.”

“But the fleur-de-lis on her shoulder?”

“She is some Englishwoman who has committed a crime in France, and has
been branded in consequence.”

“Athos, she is your wife, I tell you,” repeated d’Artagnan; “only
reflect how much the two descriptions resemble each other.”

“Yes; but I should think the other must be dead, I hanged her so
effectually.”

It was d’Artagnan who now shook his head in his turn.

“But in either case, what is to be done?” said the young man.

“The fact is, one cannot remain thus, with a sword hanging eternally
over his head,” said Athos. “We must extricate ourselves from this
position.”

“But how?”

“Listen! You must try to see her, and have an explanation with her. Say
to her: ‘Peace or war! My word as a gentleman never to say anything of
you, never to do anything against you; on your side, a solemn oath to
remain neutral with respect to me. If not, I will apply to the
chancellor, I will apply to the king, I will apply to the hangman, I
will move the courts against you, I will denounce you as branded, I will
bring you to trial; and if you are acquitted, well, by the faith of a
gentleman, I will kill you at the corner of some wall, as I would a mad
dog.’”

“I like the means well enough,” said d’Artagnan, “but where and how to
meet with her?”

“Time, dear friend, time brings round opportunity; opportunity is the
martingale of man. The more we have ventured the more we gain, when we
know how to wait.”

“Yes; but to wait surrounded by assassins and poisoners.”

“Bah!” said Athos. “God has preserved us hitherto, God will preserve us
still.”

“Yes, we. Besides, we are men; and everything considered, it is our lot
to risk our lives; but she,” asked he, in an undertone.

“What she?” asked Athos.

“Constance.”

“Madame Bonacieux! Ah, that’s true!” said Athos. “My poor friend, I had
forgotten you were in love.”

“Well, but,” said Aramis, “have you not learned by the letter you found
on the wretched corpse that she is in a convent? One may be very
comfortable in a convent; and as soon as the siege of La Rochelle is
terminated, I promise you on my part--”

“Good,” cried Athos, “good! Yes, my dear Aramis, we all know that your
views have a religious tendency.”

“I am only temporarily a Musketeer,” said Aramis, humbly.

“It is some time since we heard from his mistress,” said Athos, in a low
voice. “But take no notice; we know all about that.”

“Well,” said Porthos, “it appears to me that the means are very simple.”

“What?” asked d’Artagnan.

“You say she is in a convent?” replied Porthos.

“Yes.”

“Very well. As soon as the siege is over, we’ll carry her off from that
convent.”

“But we must first learn what convent she is in.”

“That’s true,” said Porthos.

“But I think I have it,” said Athos. “Don’t you say, dear d’Artagnan,
that it is the queen who has made choice of the convent for her?”

“I believe so, at least.”

“In that case Porthos will assist us.”

“And how so, if you please?”

“Why, by your marchioness, your duchess, your princess. She must have a
long arm.”

“Hush!” said Porthos, placing a finger on his lips. “I believe her to be
a cardinalist; she must know nothing of the matter.”

“Then,” said Aramis, “I take upon myself to obtain intelligence of her.”

“You, Aramis?” cried the three friends. “You! And how?”

“By the queen’s almoner, to whom I am very intimately allied,” said
Aramis, coloring.

And on this assurance, the four friends, who had finished their modest
repast, separated, with the promise of meeting again that evening.
D’Artagnan returned to less important affairs, and the three Musketeers
repaired to the king’s quarters, where they had to prepare their
lodging.




43 THE SIGN OF THE RED DOVECOT


Meanwhile the king, who, with more reason than the cardinal, showed his
hatred for Buckingham, although scarcely arrived was in such a haste to
meet the enemy that he commanded every disposition to be made to drive
the English from the Isle of Re, and afterward to press the siege of La
Rochelle; but notwithstanding his earnest wish, he was delayed by the
dissensions which broke out between MM Bassompierre and Schomberg,
against the Duc d’Angouleme.

MM Bassompierre and Schomberg were marshals of France, and claimed their
right of commanding the army under the orders of the king; but the
cardinal, who feared that Bassompierre, a Huguenot at heart, might press
but feebly the English and Rochellais, his brothers in religion,
supported the Duc d’Angouleme, whom the king, at his instigation, had
named lieutenant general. The result was that to prevent MM Bassompierre
and Schomberg from deserting the army, a separate command had to be
given to each. Bassompierre took up his quarters on the north of the
city, between Leu and Dompierre; the Duc d’Angouleme on the east, from
Dompierre to Perigny; and M. de Schomberg on the south, from Perigny to
Angoutin.

The quarters of Monsieur were at Dompierre; the quarters of the king
were sometimes at Estree, sometimes at Jarrie; the cardinal’s quarters
were upon the downs, at the bridge of La Pierre, in a simple house
without any entrenchment. So that Monsieur watched Bassompierre; the
king, the Duc d’Angouleme; and the cardinal, M. de Schomberg.

As soon as this organization was established, they set about driving the
English from the Isle.

The juncture was favorable. The English, who require, above everything,
good living in order to be good soldiers, only eating salt meat and bad
biscuit, had many invalids in their camp. Still further, the sea, very
rough at this period of the year all along the sea coast, destroyed
every day some little vessel; and the shore, from the point of
l’Aiguillon to the trenches, was at every tide literally covered with
the wrecks of pinnacles, roberges, and feluccas. The result was that
even if the king’s troops remained quietly in their camp, it was evident
that some day or other, Buckingham, who only continued in the Isle from
obstinacy, would be obliged to raise the siege.

But as M. de Toiras gave information that everything was preparing in
the enemy’s camp for a fresh assault, the king judged that it would be
best to put an end to the affair, and gave the necessary orders for a
decisive action.

As it is not our intention to give a journal of the siege, but on the
contrary only to describe such of the events of it as are connected with
the story we are relating, we will content ourselves with saying in two
words that the expedition succeeded, to the great astonishment of the
king and the great glory of the cardinal. The English, repulsed foot by
foot, beaten in all encounters, and defeated in the passage of the Isle
of Loie, were obliged to re-embark, leaving on the field of battle two
thousand men, among whom were five colonels, three lieutenant colonels,
two hundred and fifty captains, twenty gentlemen of rank, four pieces of
cannon, and sixty flags, which were taken to Paris by Claude de St.
Simon, and suspended with great pomp in the arches of Notre Dame.

Te Deums were chanted in camp, and afterward throughout France.

The cardinal was left free to carry on the siege, without having, at
least at the present, anything to fear on the part of the English.

But it must be acknowledged, this response was but momentary. An envoy
of the Duke of Buckingham, named Montague, was taken, and proof was
obtained of a league between the German Empire, Spain, England, and
Lorraine. This league was directed against France.

Still further, in Buckingham’s lodging, which he had been forced to
abandon more precipitately than he expected, papers were found which
confirmed this alliance and which, as the cardinal asserts in his
memoirs, strongly compromised Mme. de Chevreuse and consequently the
queen.

It was upon the cardinal that all the responsibility fell, for one is
not a despotic minister without responsibility. All, therefore, of the
vast resources of his genius were at work night and day, engaged in
listening to the least report heard in any of the great kingdoms of
Europe.

The cardinal was acquainted with the activity, and more particularly the
hatred, of Buckingham. If the league which threatened France triumphed,
all his influence would be lost. Spanish policy and Austrian policy
would have their representatives in the cabinet of the Louvre, where
they had as yet but partisans; and he, Richelieu--the French minister,
the national minister--would be ruined. The king, even while obeying him
like a child, hated him as a child hates his master, and would abandon
him to the personal vengeance of Monsieur and the queen. He would then
be lost, and France, perhaps, with him. All this must be prepared
against.

Courtiers, becoming every instant more numerous, succeeded one another,
day and night, in the little house of the bridge of La Pierre, in which
the cardinal had established his residence.

There were monks who wore the frock with such an ill grace that it was
easy to perceive they belonged to the church militant; women a little
inconvenienced by their costume as pages and whose large trousers could
not entirely conceal their rounded forms; and peasants with blackened
hands but with fine limbs, savoring of the man of quality a league off.

There were also less agreeable visits--for two or three times reports
were spread that the cardinal had nearly been assassinated.

It is true that the enemies of the cardinal said that it was he himself
who set these bungling assassins to work, in order to have, if wanted,
the right of using reprisals; but we must not believe everything
ministers say, nor everything their enemies say.

These attempts did not prevent the cardinal, to whom his most inveterate
detractors have never denied personal bravery, from making nocturnal
excursions, sometimes to communicate to the Duc d’Angouleme important
orders, sometimes to confer with the king, and sometimes to have an
interview with a messenger whom he did not wish to see at home.

On their part the Musketeers, who had not much to do with the siege,
were not under very strict orders and led a joyous life. This was the
more easy for our three companions in particular; for being friends of
M. de Treville, they obtained from him special permission to be absent
after the closing of the camp.

Now, one evening when d’Artagnan, who was in the trenches, was not able
to accompany them, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, mounted on their battle
steeds, enveloped in their war cloaks, with their hands upon their
pistol butts, were returning from a drinking place called the Red
Dovecot, which Athos had discovered two days before upon the route to
Jarrie, following the road which led to the camp and quite on their
guard, as we have stated, for fear of an ambuscade, when, about a
quarter of a league from the village of Boisnau, they fancied they heard
the sound of horses approaching them. They immediately all three halted,
closed in, and waited, occupying the middle of the road. In an instant,
and as the moon broke from behind a cloud, they saw at a turning of the
road two horsemen who, on perceiving them, stopped in their turn,
appearing to deliberate whether they should continue their route or go
back. The hesitation created some suspicion in the three friends, and
Athos, advancing a few paces in front of the others, cried in a firm
voice, “Who goes there?”

“Who goes there, yourselves?” replied one of the horsemen.

“That is not an answer,” replied Athos. “Who goes there? Answer, or we
charge.”

“Beware of what you are about, gentlemen!” said a clear voice which
seemed accustomed to command.

“It is some superior officer making his night rounds,” said Athos. “What
do you wish, gentlemen?”

“Who are you?” said the same voice, in the same commanding tone. “Answer
in your turn, or you may repent of your disobedience.”

“King’s Musketeers,” said Athos, more and more convinced that he who
interrogated them had the right to do so.

“What company?”

“Company of Treville.”

“Advance, and give an account of what you are doing here at this hour.”

The three companions advanced rather humbly--for all were now convinced
that they had to do with someone more powerful than themselves--leaving
Athos the post of speaker.

One of the two riders, he who had spoken second, was ten paces in front
of his companion. Athos made a sign to Porthos and Aramis also to remain
in the rear, and advanced alone.

“Your pardon, my officer,” said Athos; “but we were ignorant with whom
we had to do, and you may see that we were keeping good guard.”

“Your name?” said the officer, who covered a part of his face with his
cloak.

“But yourself, monsieur,” said Athos, who began to be annoyed by this
inquisition, “give me, I beg you, the proof that you have the right to
question me.”

“Your name?” repeated the cavalier a second time, letting his cloak
fall, and leaving his face uncovered.

“Monsieur the Cardinal!” cried the stupefied Musketeer.

“Your name?” cried his Eminence, for the third time.

“Athos,” said the Musketeer.

The cardinal made a sign to his attendant, who drew near. “These three
Musketeers shall follow us,” said he, in an undertone. “I am not willing
it should be known I have left the camp; and if they follow us we shall
be certain they will tell nobody.”

“We are gentlemen, monseigneur,” said Athos; “require our parole, and
give yourself no uneasiness. Thank God, we can keep a secret.”

The cardinal fixed his piercing eyes on this courageous speaker.

“You have a quick ear, Monsieur Athos,” said the cardinal; “but now
listen to this. It is not from mistrust that I request you to follow me,
but for my security. Your companions are no doubt Messieurs Porthos and
Aramis.”

“Yes, your Eminence,” said Athos, while the two Musketeers who had
remained behind advanced hat in hand.

“I know you, gentlemen,” said the cardinal, “I know you. I know you are
not quite my friends, and I am sorry you are not so; but I know you are
brave and loyal gentlemen, and that confidence may be placed in you.
Monsieur Athos, do me, then, the honor to accompany me; you and your two
friends, and then I shall have an escort to excite envy in his Majesty,
if we should meet him.”

The three Musketeers bowed to the necks of their horses.

“Well, upon my honor,” said Athos, “your Eminence is right in taking us
with you; we have seen several ill-looking faces on the road, and we
have even had a quarrel at the Red Dovecot with four of those faces.”

“A quarrel, and what for, gentlemen?” said the cardinal; “you know I
don’t like quarrelers.”

“And that is the reason why I have the honor to inform your Eminence of
what has happened; for you might learn it from others, and upon a false
account believe us to be in fault.”

“What have been the results of your quarrel?” said the cardinal,
knitting his brow.

“My friend, Aramis, here, has received a slight sword wound in the arm,
but not enough to prevent him, as your Eminence may see, from mounting
to the assault tomorrow, if your Eminence orders an escalade.”

“But you are not the men to allow sword wounds to be inflicted upon you
thus,” said the cardinal. “Come, be frank, gentlemen, you have settled
accounts with somebody! Confess; you know I have the right of giving
absolution.”

“I, monseigneur?” said Athos. “I did not even draw my sword, but I took
him who offended me round the body, and threw him out of the window. It
appears that in falling,” continued Athos, with some hesitation, “he
broke his thigh.”

“Ah, ah!” said the cardinal; “and you, Monsieur Porthos?”

“I, monseigneur, knowing that dueling is prohibited--I seized a bench,
and gave one of those brigands such a blow that I believe his shoulder
is broken.”

“Very well,” said the cardinal; “and you, Monsieur Aramis?”

“Monseigneur, being of a very mild disposition, and being, likewise, of
which Monseigneur perhaps is not aware, about to enter into orders, I
endeavored to appease my comrades, when one of these wretches gave me a
wound with a sword, treacherously, across my left arm. Then I admit my
patience failed me; I drew my sword in my turn, and as he came back to
the charge, I fancied I felt that in throwing himself upon me, he let it
pass through his body. I only know for a certainty that he fell; and it
seemed to me that he was borne away with his two companions.”

“The devil, gentlemen!” said the cardinal, “three men placed hors de
combat in a cabaret squabble! You don’t do your work by halves. And pray
what was this quarrel about?”

“These fellows were drunk,” said Athos, “and knowing there was a lady
who had arrived at the cabaret this evening, they wanted to force her
door.”

“Force her door!” said the cardinal, “and for what purpose?”

“To do her violence, without doubt,” said Athos. “I have had the honor
of informing your Eminence that these men were drunk.”

“And was this lady young and handsome?” asked the cardinal, with a
certain degree of anxiety.

“We did not see her, monseigneur,” said Athos.

“You did not see her? Ah, very well,” replied the cardinal, quickly.
“You did well to defend the honor of a woman; and as I am going to the
Red Dovecot myself, I shall know if you have told me the truth.”

“Monseigneur,” said Athos, haughtily, “we are gentlemen, and to save our
heads we would not be guilty of a falsehood.”

“Therefore I do not doubt what you say, Monsieur Athos, I do not doubt
it for a single instant; but,” added he, “to change the conversation,
was this lady alone?”

“The lady had a cavalier shut up with her,” said Athos, “but as
notwithstanding the noise, this cavalier did not show himself, it is to
be presumed that he is a coward.”

“‘Judge not rashly’, says the Gospel,” replied the cardinal.

Athos bowed.

“And now, gentlemen, that’s well,” continued the cardinal. “I know what
I wish to know; follow me.”

The three Musketeers passed behind his Eminence, who again enveloped his
face in his cloak, and put his horse in motion, keeping from eight to
ten paces in advance of his four companions.

They soon arrived at the silent, solitary inn. No doubt the host knew
what illustrious visitor was expected, and had consequently sent
intruders out of the way.

Ten paces from the door the cardinal made a sign to his esquire and the
three Musketeers to halt. A saddled horse was fastened to the window
shutter. The cardinal knocked three times, and in a peculiar manner.

A man, enveloped in a cloak, came out immediately, and exchanged some
rapid words with the cardinal; after which he mounted his horse, and set
off in the direction of Surgeres, which was likewise the way to Paris.

“Advance, gentlemen,” said the cardinal.

“You have told me the truth, my gentlemen,” said he, addressing the
Musketeers, “and it will not be my fault if our encounter this evening
be not advantageous to you. In the meantime, follow me.”

The cardinal alighted; the three Musketeers did likewise. The cardinal
threw the bridle of his horse to his esquire; the three Musketeers
fastened the horses to the shutters.

The host stood at the door. For him, the cardinal was only an officer
coming to visit a lady.

“Have you any chamber on the ground floor where these gentlemen can wait
near a good fire?” said the cardinal.

The host opened the door of a large room, in which an old stove had just
been replaced by a large and excellent chimney.

“I have this,” said he.

“That will do,” replied the cardinal. “Enter, gentlemen, and be kind
enough to wait for me; I shall not be more than half an hour.”

And while the three Musketeers entered the ground floor room, the
cardinal, without asking further information, ascended the staircase
like a man who has no need of having his road pointed out to him.




44 THE UTILITY OF STOVEPIPES


It was evident that without suspecting it, and actuated solely by their
chivalrous and adventurous character, our three friends had just
rendered a service to someone the cardinal honored with his special
protection.

Now, who was that someone? That was the question the three Musketeers
put to one another. Then, seeing that none of their replies could throw
any light on the subject, Porthos called the host and asked for dice.

Porthos and Aramis placed themselves at the table and began to play.
Athos walked about in a contemplative mood.

While thinking and walking, Athos passed and repassed before the pipe of
the stove, broken in halves, the other extremity passing into the
chamber above; and every time he passed and repassed he heard a murmur
of words, which at length fixed his attention. Athos went close to it,
and distinguished some words that appeared to merit so great an interest
that he made a sign to his friends to be silent, remaining himself bent
with his ear directed to the opening of the lower orifice.

“Listen, Milady,” said the cardinal, “the affair is important. Sit down,
and let us talk it over.”

“Milady!” murmured Athos.

“I listen to your Eminence with greatest attention,” replied a female
voice which made the Musketeer start.

“A small vessel with an English crew, whose captain is on my side,
awaits you at the mouth of Charente, at Fort La Pointe*. He will set
sail tomorrow morning.”

    _*Fort La Pointe, or Fort Vasou, was not built until 1672,
            nearly 50 years later._

“I must go thither tonight?”

“Instantly! That is to say, when you have received my instructions. Two
men, whom you will find at the door on going out, will serve you as
escort. You will allow me to leave first; then, after half an hour, you
can go away in your turn.”

“Yes, monseigneur. Now let us return to the mission with which you wish
to charge me; and as I desire to continue to merit the confidence of
your Eminence, deign to unfold it to me in terms clear and precise, that
I may not commit an error.”

There was an instant of profound silence between the two interlocutors.
It was evident that the cardinal was weighing beforehand the terms in
which he was about to speak, and that Milady was collecting all her
intellectual faculties to comprehend the things he was about to say, and
to engrave them in her memory when they should be spoken.

Athos took advantage of this moment to tell his two companions to fasten
the door inside, and to make them a sign to come and listen with him.

The two Musketeers, who loved their ease, brought a chair for each of
themselves and one for Athos. All three then sat down with their heads
together and their ears on the alert.

“You will go to London,” continued the cardinal. “Arrived in London, you
will seek Buckingham.”

“I must beg your Eminence to observe,” said Milady, “that since the
affair of the diamond studs, about which the duke always suspected me,
his Grace distrusts me.”

“Well, this time,” said the cardinal, “it is not necessary to steal his
confidence, but to present yourself frankly and loyally as a
negotiator.”

“Frankly and loyally,” repeated Milady, with an unspeakable expression
of duplicity.

“Yes, frankly and loyally,” replied the cardinal, in the same tone. “All
this negotiation must be carried on openly.”

“I will follow your Eminence’s instructions to the letter. I only wait
till you give them.”

“You will go to Buckingham in my behalf, and you will tell him I am
acquainted with all the preparations he has made; but that they give me
no uneasiness, since at the first step he takes I will ruin the queen.”

“Will he believe that your Eminence is in a position to accomplish the
threat thus made?”

“Yes; for I have the proofs.”

“I must be able to present these proofs for his appreciation.”

“Without doubt. And you will tell him I will publish the report of
Bois-Robert and the Marquis de Beautru, upon the interview which the
duke had at the residence of Madame the Constable with the queen on the
evening Madame the Constable gave a masquerade. You will tell him, in
order that he may not doubt, that he came there in the costume of the
Great Mogul, which the Chevalier de Guise was to have worn, and that he
purchased this exchange for the sum of three thousand pistoles.”

“Well, monseigneur?”

“All the details of his coming into and going out of the palace--on the
night when he introduced himself in the character of an Italian fortune
teller--you will tell him, that he may not doubt the correctness of my
information; that he had under his cloak a large white robe dotted with
black tears, death’s heads, and crossbones--for in case of a surprise,
he was to pass for the phantom of the White Lady who, as all the world
knows, appears at the Louvre every time any great event is impending.”

“Is that all, monseigneur?”

“Tell him also that I am acquainted with all the details of the
adventure at Amiens; that I will have a little romance made of it,
wittily turned, with a plan of the garden and portraits of the principal
actors in that nocturnal romance.”

“I will tell him that.”

“Tell him further that I hold Montague in my power; that Montague is in
the Bastille; that no letters were found upon him, it is true, but that
torture may make him tell much of what he knows, and even what he does
not know.”

“Exactly.”

“Then add that his Grace has, in the precipitation with which he quit
the Isle of Re, forgotten and left behind him in his lodging a certain
letter from Madame de Chevreuse which singularly compromises the queen,
inasmuch as it proves not only that her Majesty can love the enemies of
the king but that she can conspire with the enemies of France. You
recollect perfectly all I have told you, do you not?”

“Your Eminence will judge: the ball of Madame the Constable; the night
at the Louvre; the evening at Amiens; the arrest of Montague; the letter
of Madame de Chevreuse.”

“That’s it,” said the cardinal, “that’s it. You have an excellent
memory, Milady.”

“But,” resumed she to whom the cardinal addressed this flattering
compliment, “if, in spite of all these reasons, the duke does not give
way and continues to menace France?”

“The duke is in love to madness, or rather to folly,” replied Richelieu,
with great bitterness. “Like the ancient paladins, he has only
undertaken this war to obtain a look from his lady love. If he becomes
certain that this war will cost the honor, and perhaps the liberty, of
the lady of his thoughts, as he says, I will answer for it he will look
twice.”

“And yet,” said Milady, with a persistence that proved she wished to see
clearly to the end of the mission with which she was about to be
charged, “if he persists?”

“If he persists?” said the cardinal. “That is not probable.”

“It is possible,” said Milady.

“If he persists--” His Eminence made a pause, and resumed: “If he
persists--well, then I shall hope for one of those events which change
the destinies of states.”

“If your Eminence would quote to me some one of these events in
history,” said Milady, “perhaps I should partake of your confidence as
to the future.”

“Well, here, for example,” said Richelieu: “when, in 1610, for a cause
similar to that which moves the duke, King Henry IV, of glorious memory,
was about, at the same time, to invade Flanders and Italy, in order to
attack Austria on both sides. Well, did there not happen an event which
saved Austria? Why should not the king of France have the same chance as
the emperor?”

“Your Eminence means, I presume, the knife stab in the Rue de la
Feronnerie?”

“Precisely,” said the cardinal.

“Does not your Eminence fear that the punishment inflicted upon
Ravaillac may deter anyone who might entertain the idea of imitating
him?”

“There will be, in all times and in all countries, particularly if
religious divisions exist in those countries, fanatics who ask nothing
better than to become martyrs. Ay, and observe--it just occurs to me
that the Puritans are furious against Buckingham, and their preachers
designate him as the Antichrist.”

“Well?” said Milady.

“Well,” continued the cardinal, in an indifferent tone, “the only thing
to be sought for at this moment is some woman, handsome, young, and
clever, who has cause of quarrel with the duke. The duke has had many
affairs of gallantry; and if he has fostered his amours by promises of
eternal constancy, he must likewise have sown the seeds of hatred by his
eternal infidelities.”

“No doubt,” said Milady, coolly, “such a woman may be found.”

“Well, such a woman, who would place the knife of Jacques Clement or of
Ravaillac in the hands of a fanatic, would save France.”

“Yes; but she would then be the accomplice of an assassination.”

“Were the accomplices of Ravaillac or of Jacques Clement ever known?”

“No; for perhaps they were too high-placed for anyone to dare look for
them where they were. The Palace of Justice would not be burned down for
everybody, monseigneur.”

“You think, then, that the fire at the Palace of Justice was not caused
by chance?” asked Richelieu, in the tone with which he would have put a
question of no importance.

“I, monseigneur?” replied Milady. “I think nothing; I quote a fact, that
is all. Only I say that if I were named Madame de Montpensier, or the
Queen Marie de Medicis, I should use less precautions than I take, being
simply called Milady Clarik.”

“That is just,” said Richelieu. “What do you require, then?”

“I require an order which would ratify beforehand all that I should
think proper to do for the greatest good of France.”

“But in the first place, this woman I have described must be found who
is desirous of avenging herself upon the duke.”

“She is found,” said Milady.

“Then the miserable fanatic must be found who will serve as an
instrument of God’s justice.”

“He will be found.”

“Well,” said the cardinal, “then it will be time to claim the order
which you just now required.”

“Your Eminence is right,” replied Milady; “and I have been wrong in
seeing in the mission with which you honor me anything but that which it
really is--that is, to announce to his Grace, on the part of your
Eminence, that you are acquainted with the different disguises by means
of which he succeeded in approaching the queen during the fete given by
Madame the Constable; that you have proofs of the interview granted at
the Louvre by the queen to a certain Italian astrologer who was no other
than the Duke of Buckingham; that you have ordered a little romance of a
satirical nature to be written upon the adventures of Amiens, with a
plan of the gardens in which those adventures took place, and portraits
of the actors who figured in them; that Montague is in the Bastille, and
that the torture may make him say things he remembers, and even things
he has forgotten; that you possess a certain letter from Madame de
Chevreuse, found in his Grace’s lodging, which singularly compromises
not only her who wrote it, but her in whose name it was written. Then,
if he persists, notwithstanding all this--as that is, as I have said,
the limit of my mission--I shall have nothing to do but to pray God to
work a miracle for the salvation of France. That is it, is it not,
monseigneur, and I shall have nothing else to do?”

“That is it,” replied the cardinal, dryly.

“And now,” said Milady, without appearing to remark the change of the
duke’s tone toward her--“now that I have received the instructions of
your Eminence as concerns your enemies, Monseigneur will permit me to
say a few words to him of mine?”

“Have you enemies, then?” asked Richelieu.

“Yes, monseigneur, enemies against whom you owe me all your support, for
I made them by serving your Eminence.”

“Who are they?” replied the duke.

“In the first place, there is a little intrigante named Bonacieux.”

“She is in the prison of Nantes.”

“That is to say, she was there,” replied Milady; “but the queen has
obtained an order from the king by means of which she has been conveyed
to a convent.”

“To a convent?” said the duke.

“Yes, to a convent.”

“And to which?”

“I don’t know; the secret has been well kept.”

“But I will know!”

“And your Eminence will tell me in what convent that woman is?”

“I can see nothing inconvenient in that,” said the cardinal.

“Well, now I have an enemy much more to be dreaded by me than this
little Madame Bonacieux.”

“Who is that?”

“Her lover.”

“What is his name?”

“Oh, your Eminence knows him well,” cried Milady, carried away by her
anger. “He is the evil genius of both of us. It is he who in an
encounter with your Eminence’s Guards decided the victory in favor of
the king’s Musketeers; it is he who gave three desperate wounds to de
Wardes, your emissary, and who caused the affair of the diamond studs to
fail; it is he who, knowing it was I who had Madame Bonacieux carried
off, has sworn my death.”

“Ah, ah!” said the cardinal, “I know of whom you speak.”

“I mean that miserable d’Artagnan.”

“He is a bold fellow,” said the cardinal.

“And it is exactly because he is a bold fellow that he is the more to be
feared.”

“I must have,” said the duke, “a proof of his connection with
Buckingham.”

“A proof?” cried Milady; “I will have ten.”

“Well, then, it becomes the simplest thing in the world; get me that
proof, and I will send him to the Bastille.”

“So far good, monseigneur; but afterwards?”

“When once in the Bastille, there is no afterward!” said the cardinal,
in a low voice. “Ah, pardieu!” continued he, “if it were as easy for me
to get rid of my enemy as it is easy to get rid of yours, and if it were
against such people you require impunity--”

“Monseigneur,” replied Milady, “a fair exchange. Life for life, man for
man; give me one, I will give you the other.”

“I don’t know what you mean, nor do I even desire to know what you
mean,” replied the cardinal; “but I wish to please you, and see nothing
out of the way in giving you what you demand with respect to so infamous
a creature--the more so as you tell me this d’Artagnan is a libertine, a
duelist, and a traitor.”

“An infamous scoundrel, monseigneur, a scoundrel!”

“Give me paper, a quill, and some ink, then,” said the cardinal.

“Here they are, monseigneur.”

There was a moment of silence, which proved that the cardinal was
employed in seeking the terms in which he should write the note, or else
in writing it. Athos, who had not lost a word of the conversation, took
his two companions by the hand, and led them to the other end of the
room.

“Well,” said Porthos, “what do you want, and why do you not let us
listen to the end of the conversation?”

“Hush!” said Athos, speaking in a low voice. “We have heard all it was
necessary we should hear; besides, I don’t prevent you from listening,
but I must be gone.”

“You must be gone!” said Porthos; “and if the cardinal asks for you,
what answer can we make?”

“You will not wait till he asks; you will speak first, and tell him that
I am gone on the lookout, because certain expressions of our host have
given me reason to think the road is not safe. I will say two words
about it to the cardinal’s esquire likewise. The rest concerns myself;
don’t be uneasy about that.”

“Be prudent, Athos,” said Aramis.

“Be easy on that head,” replied Athos; “you know I am cool enough.”

Porthos and Aramis resumed their places by the stovepipe.

As to Athos, he went out without any mystery, took his horse, which was
tied with those of his friends to the fastenings of the shutters, in
four words convinced the attendant of the necessity of a vanguard for
their return, carefully examined the priming of his pistols, drew his
sword, and took, like a forlorn hope, the road to the camp.




45 A CONJUGAL SCENE


As Athos had foreseen, it was not long before the cardinal came down. He
opened the door of the room in which the Musketeers were, and found
Porthos playing an earnest game of dice with Aramis. He cast a rapid
glance around the room, and perceived that one of his men was missing.

“What has become of Monseigneur Athos?” asked he.

“Monseigneur,” replied Porthos, “he has gone as a scout, on account of
some words of our host, which made him believe the road was not safe.”

“And you, what have you done, Monsieur Porthos?”

“I have won five pistoles of Aramis.”

“Well; now will you return with me?”

“We are at your Eminence’s orders.”

“To horse, then, gentlemen; for it is getting late.”

The attendant was at the door, holding the cardinal’s horse by the
bridle. At a short distance a group of two men and three horses appeared
in the shade. These were the two men who were to conduct Milady to Fort
La Pointe, and superintend her embarkation.

The attendant confirmed to the cardinal what the two Musketeers had
already said with respect to Athos. The cardinal made an approving
gesture, and retraced his route with the same precautions he had used
incoming.

Let us leave him to follow the road to the camp protected by his esquire
and the two Musketeers, and return to Athos.

For a hundred paces he maintained the speed at which he started; but
when out of sight he turned his horse to the right, made a circuit, and
came back within twenty paces of a high hedge to watch the passage of
the little troop. Having recognized the laced hats of his companions and
the golden fringe of the cardinal’s cloak, he waited till the horsemen
had turned the angle of the road, and having lost sight of them, he
returned at a gallop to the inn, which was opened to him without
hesitation.

The host recognized him.

“My officer,” said Athos, “has forgotten to give a piece of very
important information to the lady, and has sent me back to repair his
forgetfulness.”

“Go up,” said the host; “she is still in her chamber.”

Athos availed himself of the permission, ascended the stairs with his
lightest step, gained the landing, and through the open door perceived
Milady putting on her hat.

He entered the chamber and closed the door behind him. At the noise he
made in pushing the bolt, Milady turned round.

Athos was standing before the door, enveloped in his cloak, with his hat
pulled down over his eyes. On seeing this figure, mute and immovable as
a statue, Milady was frightened.

“Who are you, and what do you want?” cried she.

“Humph,” murmured Athos, “it is certainly she!”

And letting fall his cloak and raising his hat, he advanced toward
Milady.

“Do you know me, madame?” said he.

Milady made one step forward, and then drew back as if she had seen a
serpent.

“So far, well,” said Athos, “I perceive you know me.”

“The Comte de la Fere!” murmured Milady, becoming exceedingly pale, and
drawing back till the wall prevented her from going any farther.

“Yes, Milady,” replied Athos; “the Comte de la Fere in person, who comes
expressly from the other world to have the pleasure of paying you a
visit. Sit down, madame, and let us talk, as the cardinal said.”

Milady, under the influence of inexpressible terror, sat down without
uttering a word.

“You certainly are a demon sent upon the earth!” said Athos. “Your power
is great, I know; but you also know that with the help of God men have
often conquered the most terrible demons. You have once before thrown
yourself in my path. I thought I had crushed you, madame; but either I
was deceived or hell has resuscitated you!”

Milady at these words, which recalled frightful remembrances, hung down
her head with a suppressed groan.

“Yes, hell has resuscitated you,” continued Athos. “Hell has made you
rich, hell has given you another name, hell has almost made you another
face; but it has neither effaced the stains from your soul nor the brand
from your body.”

Milady arose as if moved by a powerful spring, and her eyes flashed
lightning. Athos remained sitting.

“You believed me to be dead, did you not, as I believed you to be? And
the name of Athos as well concealed the Comte de la Fere, as the name
Milady Clarik concealed Anne de Breuil. Was it not so you were called
when your honored brother married us? Our position is truly a strange
one,” continued Athos, laughing. “We have only lived up to the present
time because we believed each other dead, and because a remembrance is
less oppressive than a living creature, though a remembrance is
sometimes devouring.”

“But,” said Milady, in a hollow, faint voice, “what brings you back to
me, and what do you want with me?”

“I wish to tell you that though remaining invisible to your eyes, I have
not lost sight of you.”

“You know what I have done?”

“I can relate to you, day by day, your actions from your entrance to the
service of the cardinal to this evening.”

A smile of incredulity passed over the pale lips of Milady.

“Listen! It was you who cut off the two diamond studs from the shoulder
of the Duke of Buckingham; it was you had the Madame Bonacieux carried
off; it was you who, in love with de Wardes and thinking to pass the
night with him, opened the door to Monsieur d’Artagnan; it was you who,
believing that de Wardes had deceived you, wished to have him killed by
his rival; it was you who, when this rival had discovered your infamous
secret, wished to have him killed in his turn by two assassins, whom you
sent in pursuit of him; it was you who, finding the balls had missed
their mark, sent poisoned wine with a forged letter, to make your victim
believe that the wine came from his friends. In short, it was you who
have but now in this chamber, seated in this chair I now fill, made an
engagement with Cardinal Richelieu to cause the Duke of Buckingham to be
assassinated, in exchange for the promise he has made you to allow you
to assassinate d’Artagnan.”

Milady was livid.

“You must be Satan!” cried she.

“Perhaps,” said Athos; “But at all events listen well to this.
Assassinate the Duke of Buckingham, or cause him to be assassinated--I
care very little about that! I don’t know him. Besides, he is an
Englishman. But do not touch with the tip of your finger a single hair
of d’Artagnan, who is a faithful friend whom I love and defend, or I
swear to you by the head of my father the crime which you shall have
endeavored to commit, or shall have committed, shall be the last.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan has cruelly insulted me,” said Milady, in a hollow
tone; “Monsieur d’Artagnan shall die!”

“Indeed! Is it possible to insult you, madame?” said Athos, laughing;
“he has insulted you, and he shall die!”

“He shall die!” replied Milady; “she first, and he afterward.”

Athos was seized with a kind of vertigo. The sight of this creature, who
had nothing of the woman about her, recalled awful remembrances. He
thought how one day, in a less dangerous situation than the one in which
he was now placed, he had already endeavored to sacrifice her to his
honor. His desire for blood returned, burning his brain and pervading
his frame like a raging fever; he arose in his turn, reached his hand to
his belt, drew forth a pistol, and cocked it.

Milady, pale as a corpse, endeavored to cry out; but her swollen tongue
could utter no more than a hoarse sound which had nothing human in it
and resembled the rattle of a wild beast. Motionless against the dark
tapestry, with her hair in disorder, she appeared like a horrid image of
terror.

Athos slowly raised his pistol, stretched out his arm so that the weapon
almost touched Milady’s forehead, and then, in a voice the more terrible
from having the supreme calmness of a fixed resolution, “Madame,” said
he, “you will this instant deliver to me the paper the cardinal signed;
or upon my soul, I will blow your brains out.”

With another man, Milady might have preserved some doubt; but she knew
Athos. Nevertheless, she remained motionless.

“You have one second to decide,” said he.

Milady saw by the contraction of his countenance that the trigger was
about to be pulled; she reached her hand quickly to her bosom, drew out
a paper, and held it toward Athos.

“Take it,” said she, “and be accursed!”

Athos took the paper, returned the pistol to his belt, approached the
lamp to be assured that it was the paper, unfolded it, and read:

“Dec. 3, 1627

“It is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of this
has done what he has done.

“RICHELIEU”

“And now,” said Athos, resuming his cloak and putting on his hat, “now
that I have drawn your teeth, viper, bite if you can.”

And he left the chamber without once looking behind him.

At the door he found the two men and the spare horse which they held.

“Gentlemen,” said he, “Monseigneur’s order is, you know, to conduct that
woman, without losing time, to Fort La Pointe, and never to leave her
till she is on board.”

As these words agreed wholly with the order they had received, they
bowed their heads in sign of assent.

With regard to Athos, he leaped lightly into the saddle and set out at
full gallop; only instead of following the road, he went across the
fields, urging his horse to the utmost and stopping occasionally to
listen.

In one of those halts he heard the steps of several horses on the road.
He had no doubt it was the cardinal and his escort. He immediately made
a new point in advance, rubbed his horse down with some heath and leaves
of trees, and placed himself across the road, about two hundred paces
from the camp.

“Who goes there?” cried he, as soon as he perceived the horsemen.

“That is our brave Musketeer, I think,” said the cardinal.

“Yes, monseigneur,” said Porthos, “it is he.”

“Monsieur Athos,” said Richelieu, “receive my thanks for the good guard
you have kept. Gentlemen, we are arrived; take the gate on the left. The
watchword is, ‘King and Re.’”

Saying these words, the cardinal saluted the three friends with an
inclination of his head, and took the right hand, followed by his
attendant--for that night he himself slept in the camp.

“Well!” said Porthos and Aramis together, as soon as the cardinal was
out of hearing, “well, he signed the paper she required!”

“I know it,” said Athos, coolly, “since here it is.”

And the three friends did not exchange another word till they reached
their quarters, except to give the watchword to the sentinels. Only they
sent Mousqueton to tell Planchet that his master was requested, the
instant that he left the trenches, to come to the quarters of the
Musketeers.

Milady, as Athos had foreseen, on finding the two men that awaited her,
made no difficulty in following them. She had had for an instant an
inclination to be reconducted to the cardinal, and relate everything to
him; but a revelation on her part would bring about a revelation on the
part of Athos. She might say that Athos had hanged her; but then Athos
would tell that she was branded. She thought it was best to preserve
silence, to discreetly set off to accomplish her difficult mission with
her usual skill; and then, all things being accomplished to the
satisfaction of the cardinal, to come to him and claim her vengeance.

In consequence, after having traveled all night, at seven o’clock she
was at the fort of the Point; at eight o’clock she had embarked; and at
nine, the vessel, which with letters of marque from the cardinal was
supposed to be sailing for Bayonne, raised anchor, and steered its
course toward England.




46 THE BASTION SAINT-GERVAIS


On arriving at the lodgings of his three friends, d’Artagnan found them
assembled in the same chamber. Athos was meditating; Porthos was
twisting his mustache; Aramis was saying his prayers in a charming
little Book of Hours, bound in blue velvet.

“Pardieu, gentlemen,” said he. “I hope what you have to tell me is worth
the trouble, or else, I warn you, I will not pardon you for making me
come here instead of getting a little rest after a night spent in taking
and dismantling a bastion. Ah, why were you not there, gentlemen? It was
warm work.”

“We were in a place where it was not very cold,” replied Porthos, giving
his mustache a twist which was peculiar to him.

“Hush!” said Athos.

“Oh, oh!” said d’Artagnan, comprehending the slight frown of the
Musketeer. “It appears there is something fresh aboard.”

“Aramis,” said Athos, “you went to breakfast the day before yesterday at
the inn of the Parpaillot, I believe?”

“Yes.”

“How did you fare?”

“For my part, I ate but little. The day before yesterday was a fish day,
and they had nothing but meat.”

“What,” said Athos, “no fish at a seaport?”

“They say,” said Aramis, resuming his pious reading, “that the dyke
which the cardinal is making drives them all out into the open sea.”

“But that is not quite what I mean to ask you, Aramis,” replied Athos.
“I want to know if you were left alone, and nobody interrupted you.”

“Why, I think there were not many intruders. Yes, Athos, I know what you
mean: we shall do very well at the Parpaillot.”

“Let us go to the Parpaillot, then, for here the walls are like sheets
of paper.”

D’Artagnan, who was accustomed to his friend’s manner of acting, and who
perceived immediately, by a word, a gesture, or a sign from him, that
the circumstances were serious, took Athos’s arm, and went out without
saying anything. Porthos followed, chatting with Aramis.

On their way they met Grimaud. Athos made him a sign to come with them.
Grimaud, according to custom, obeyed in silence; the poor lad had nearly
come to the pass of forgetting how to speak.

They arrived at the drinking room of the Parpaillot. It was seven
o’clock in the morning, and daylight began to appear. The three friends
ordered breakfast, and went into a room in which the host said they
would not be disturbed.

Unfortunately, the hour was badly chosen for a private conference. The
morning drum had just been beaten; everyone shook off the drowsiness of
night, and to dispel the humid morning air, came to take a drop at the
inn. Dragoons, Swiss, Guardsmen, Musketeers, light-horsemen, succeeded
one another with a rapidity which might answer the purpose of the host
very well, but agreed badly with the views of the four friends. Thus
they applied very curtly to the salutations, healths, and jokes of their
companions.

“I see how it will be,” said Athos: “we shall get into some pretty
quarrel or other, and we have no need of one just now. D’Artagnan, tell
us what sort of a night you have had, and we will describe ours
afterward.”

“Ah, yes,” said a light-horseman, with a glass of brandy in his hand,
which he sipped slowly. “I hear you gentlemen of the Guards have been in
the trenches tonight, and that you did not get much the best of the
Rochellais.”

D’Artagnan looked at Athos to know if he ought to reply to this intruder
who thus mixed unasked in their conversation.

“Well,” said Athos, “don’t you hear Monsieur de Busigny, who does you
the honor to ask you a question? Relate what has passed during the
night, since these gentlemen desire to know it.”

“Have you not taken a bastion?” said a Swiss, who was drinking rum out
of a beer glass.

“Yes, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan, bowing, “we have had that honor. We
even have, as you may have heard, introduced a barrel of powder under
one of the angles, which in blowing up made a very pretty breach.
Without reckoning that as the bastion was not built yesterday all the
rest of the building was badly shaken.”

“And what bastion is it?” asked a dragoon, with his saber run through a
goose which he was taking to be cooked.

“The bastion St. Gervais,” replied d’Artagnan, “from behind which the
Rochellais annoyed our workmen.”

“Was that affair hot?”

“Yes, moderately so. We lost five men, and the Rochellais eight or ten.”

“Balzempleu!” said the Swiss, who, notwithstanding the admirable
collection of oaths possessed by the German language, had acquired a
habit of swearing in French.

“But it is probable,” said the light-horseman, “that they will send
pioneers this morning to repair the bastion.”

“Yes, that’s probable,” said d’Artagnan.

“Gentlemen,” said Athos, “a wager!”

“Ah, wooi, a vager!” cried the Swiss.

“What is it?” said the light-horseman.

“Stop a bit,” said the dragoon, placing his saber like a spit upon the
two large iron dogs which held the firebrands in the chimney, “stop a
bit, I am in it. You cursed host! a dripping pan immediately, that I may
not lose a drop of the fat of this estimable bird.”

“You was right,” said the Swiss; “goose grease is kood with basdry.”

“There!” said the dragoon. “Now for the wager! We listen, Monsieur
Athos.”

“Yes, the wager!” said the light-horseman.

“Well, Monsieur de Busigny, I will bet you,” said Athos, “that my three
companions, Messieurs Porthos, Aramis, and d’Artagnan, and myself, will
go and breakfast in the bastion St. Gervais, and we will remain there an
hour, by the watch, whatever the enemy may do to dislodge us.”

Porthos and Aramis looked at each other; they began to comprehend.

“But,” said d’Artagnan, in the ear of Athos, “you are going to get us
all killed without mercy.”

“We are much more likely to be killed,” said Athos, “if we do not go.”

“My faith, gentlemen,” said Porthos, turning round upon his chair and
twisting his mustache, “that’s a fair bet, I hope.”

“I take it,” said M. de Busigny; “so let us fix the stake.”

“You are four gentlemen,” said Athos, “and we are four; an unlimited
dinner for eight. Will that do?”

“Capitally,” replied M. de Busigny.

“Perfectly,” said the dragoon.

“That shoots me,” said the Swiss.

The fourth auditor, who during all this conversation had played a mute
part, made a sign of the head in proof that he acquiesced in the
proposition.

“The breakfast for these gentlemen is ready,” said the host.

“Well, bring it,” said Athos.

The host obeyed. Athos called Grimaud, pointed to a large basket which
lay in a corner, and made a sign to him to wrap the viands up in the
napkins.

Grimaud understood that it was to be a breakfast on the grass, took the
basket, packed up the viands, added the bottles, and then took the
basket on his arm.

“But where are you going to eat my breakfast?” asked the host.

“What matter, if you are paid for it?” said Athos, and he threw two
pistoles majestically on the table.

“Shall I give you the change, my officer?” said the host.

“No, only add two bottles of champagne, and the difference will be for
the napkins.”

The host had not quite so good a bargain as he at first hoped for, but
he made amends by slipping in two bottles of Anjou wine instead of two
bottles of champagne.

“Monsieur de Busigny,” said Athos, “will you be so kind as to set your
watch with mine, or permit me to regulate mine by yours?”

“Which you please, monsieur!” said the light-horseman, drawing from his
fob a very handsome watch, studded with diamonds; “half past seven.”

“Thirty-five minutes after seven,” said Athos, “by which you perceive I
am five minutes faster than you.”

And bowing to all the astonished persons present, the young men took the
road to the bastion St. Gervais, followed by Grimaud, who carried the
basket, ignorant of where he was going but in the passive obedience
which Athos had taught him not even thinking of asking.

As long as they were within the circle of the camp, the four friends did
not exchange one word; besides, they were followed by the curious, who,
hearing of the wager, were anxious to know how they would come out of
it. But when once they passed the line of circumvallation and found
themselves in the open plain, d’Artagnan, who was completely ignorant of
what was going forward, thought it was time to demand an explanation.

“And now, my dear Athos,” said he, “do me the kindness to tell me where
we are going?”

“Why, you see plainly enough we are going to the bastion.”

“But what are we going to do there?”

“You know well that we go to breakfast there.”

“But why did we not breakfast at the Parpaillot?”

“Because we have very important matters to communicate to one another,
and it was impossible to talk five minutes in that inn without being
annoyed by all those importunate fellows, who keep coming in, saluting
you, and addressing you. Here at least,” said Athos, pointing to the
bastion, “they will not come and disturb us.”

“It appears to me,” said d’Artagnan, with that prudence which allied
itself in him so naturally with excessive bravery, “that we could have
found some retired place on the downs or the seashore.”

“Where we should have been seen all four conferring together, so that at
the end of a quarter of an hour the cardinal would have been informed by
his spies that we were holding a council.”

“Yes,” said Aramis, “Athos is right: ANIMADVERTUNTUR IN DESERTIS.”

“A desert would not have been amiss,” said Porthos; “but it behooved us
to find it.”

“There is no desert where a bird cannot pass over one’s head, where a
fish cannot leap out of the water, where a rabbit cannot come out of its
burrow, and I believe that bird, fish, and rabbit each becomes a spy of
the cardinal. Better, then, pursue our enterprise; from which, besides,
we cannot retreat without shame. We have made a wager--a wager which
could not have been foreseen, and of which I defy anyone to divine the
true cause. We are going, in order to win it, to remain an hour in the
bastion. Either we shall be attacked, or not. If we are not, we shall
have all the time to talk, and nobody will hear us--for I guarantee the
walls of the bastion have no ears; if we are, we will talk of our
affairs just the same. Moreover, in defending ourselves, we shall cover
ourselves with glory. You see that everything is to our advantage.”

“Yes,” said d’Artagnan; “but we shall indubitably attract a ball.”

“Well, my dear,” replied Athos, “you know well that the balls most to be
dreaded are not from the enemy.”

“But for such an expedition we surely ought to have brought our
muskets.”

“You are stupid, friend Porthos. Why should we load ourselves with a
useless burden?”

“I don’t find a good musket, twelve cartridges, and a powder flask very
useless in the face of an enemy.”

“Well,” replied Athos, “have you not heard what d’Artagnan said?”

“What did he say?” demanded Porthos.

“d’Artagnan said that in the attack of last night eight or ten Frenchmen
were killed, and as many Rochellais.”

“What then?”

“The bodies were not plundered, were they? It appears the conquerors had
something else to do.”

“Well?”

“Well, we shall find their muskets, their cartridges, and their flasks;
and instead of four musketoons and twelve balls, we shall have fifteen
guns and a hundred charges to fire.”

“Oh, Athos!” said Aramis, “truly you are a great man.”

Porthos nodded in sign of agreement. D’Artagnan alone did not seem
convinced.

Grimaud no doubt shared the misgivings of the young man, for seeing that
they continued to advance toward the bastion--something he had till then
doubted--he pulled his master by the skirt of his coat.

“Where are we going?” asked he, by a gesture.

Athos pointed to the bastion.

“But,” said Grimaud, in the same silent dialect, “we shall leave our
skins there.”

Athos raised his eyes and his finger toward heaven.

Grimaud put his basket on the ground and sat down with a shake of the
head.

Athos took a pistol from his belt, looked to see if it was properly
primed, cocked it, and placed the muzzle close to Grimaud’s ear.

Grimaud was on his legs again as if by a spring. Athos then made him a
sign to take up his basket and to walk on first. Grimaud obeyed. All
that Grimaud gained by this momentary pantomime was to pass from the
rear guard to the vanguard.

Arrived at the bastion, the four friends turned round.

More than three hundred soldiers of all kinds were assembled at the gate
of the camp; and in a separate group might be distinguished M. de
Busigny, the dragoon, the Swiss, and the fourth bettor.

Athos took off his hat, placed it on the end of his sword, and waved it
in the air.

All the spectators returned him his salute, accompanying this courtesy
with a loud hurrah which was audible to the four; after which all four
disappeared in the bastion, whither Grimaud had preceded them.




47 THE COUNCIL OF THE MUSKETEERS


As Athos had foreseen, the bastion was only occupied by a dozen corpses,
French and Rochellais.

“Gentlemen,” said Athos, who had assumed the command of the expedition,
“while Grimaud spreads the table, let us begin by collecting the guns
and cartridges together. We can talk while performing that necessary
task. These gentlemen,” added he, pointing to the bodies, “cannot hear
us.”

“But we could throw them into the ditch,” said Porthos, “after having
assured ourselves they have nothing in their pockets.”

“Yes,” said Athos, “that’s Grimaud’s business.”

“Well, then,” cried d’Artagnan, “pray let Grimaud search them and throw
them over the walls.”

“Heaven forfend!” said Athos; “they may serve us.”

“These bodies serve us?” said Porthos. “You are mad, dear friend.”

“Judge not rashly, say the gospel and the cardinal,” replied Athos. “How
many guns, gentlemen?”

“Twelve,” replied Aramis.

“How many shots?”

“A hundred.”

“That’s quite as many as we shall want. Let us load the guns.”

The four Musketeers went to work; and as they were loading the last
musket Grimaud announced that the breakfast was ready.

Athos replied, always by gestures, that that was well, and indicated to
Grimaud, by pointing to a turret that resembled a pepper caster, that he
was to stand as sentinel. Only, to alleviate the tediousness of the
duty, Athos allowed him to take a loaf, two cutlets, and a bottle of
wine.

“And now to table,” said Athos.

The four friends seated themselves on the ground with their legs crossed
like Turks, or even tailors.

“And now,” said d’Artagnan, “as there is no longer any fear of being
overheard, I hope you are going to let me into your secret.”

“I hope at the same time to procure you amusement and glory, gentlemen,”
said Athos. “I have induced you to take a charming promenade; here is a
delicious breakfast; and yonder are five hundred persons, as you may see
through the loopholes, taking us for heroes or madmen--two classes of
imbeciles greatly resembling each other.”

“But the secret!” said d’Artagnan.

“The secret is,” said Athos, “that I saw Milady last night.”

D’Artagnan was lifting a glass to his lips; but at the name of Milady,
his hand trembled so, that he was obliged to put the glass on the ground
again for fear of spilling the contents.”

“You saw your wi--”

“Hush!” interrupted Athos. “You forget, my dear, you forget that these
gentlemen are not initiated into my family affairs like yourself. I have
seen Milady.”

“Where?” demanded d’Artagnan.

“Within two leagues of this place, at the inn of the Red Dovecot.”

“In that case I am lost,” said d’Artagnan.

“Not so bad yet,” replied Athos; “for by this time she must have quit
the shores of France.”

D’Artagnan breathed again.

“But after all,” asked Porthos, “who is Milady?”

“A charming woman!” said Athos, sipping a glass of sparkling wine.
“Villainous host!” cried he, “he has given us Anjou wine instead of
champagne, and fancies we know no better! Yes,” continued he, “a
charming woman, who entertained kind views toward our friend d’Artagnan,
who, on his part, has given her some offense for which she tried to
revenge herself a month ago by having him killed by two musket shots, a
week ago by trying to poison him, and yesterday by demanding his head of
the cardinal.”

“What! by demanding my head of the cardinal?” cried d’Artagnan, pale
with terror.

“Yes, that is true as the Gospel,” said Porthos; “I heard her with my
own ears.”

“I also,” said Aramis.

“Then,” said d’Artagnan, letting his arm fall with discouragement, “it
is useless to struggle longer. I may as well blow my brains out, and all
will be over.”

“That’s the last folly to be committed,” said Athos, “seeing it is the
only one for which there is no remedy.”

“But I can never escape,” said d’Artagnan, “with such enemies. First, my
stranger of Meung; then de Wardes, to whom I have given three sword
wounds; next Milady, whose secret I have discovered; finally, the
cardinal, whose vengeance I have balked.”

“Well,” said Athos, “that only makes four; and we are four--one for one.
Pardieu! if we may believe the signs Grimaud is making, we are about to
have to do with a very different number of people. What is it, Grimaud?
Considering the gravity of the occasion, I permit you to speak, my
friend; but be laconic, I beg. What do you see?”

“A troop.”

“Of how many persons?”

“Twenty men.”

“What sort of men?”

“Sixteen pioneers, four soldiers.”

“How far distant?”

“Five hundred paces.”

“Good! We have just time to finish this fowl and to drink one glass of
wine to your health, d’Artagnan.”

“To your health!” repeated Porthos and Aramis.

“Well, then, to my health! although I am very much afraid that your good
wishes will not be of great service to me.”

“Bah!” said Athos, “God is great, as say the followers of Mohammed, and
the future is in his hands.”

Then, swallowing the contents of his glass, which he put down close to
him, Athos arose carelessly, took the musket next to him, and drew near
to one of the loopholes.

Porthos, Aramis and d’Artagnan followed his example. As to Grimaud, he
received orders to place himself behind the four friends in order to
reload their weapons.

“Pardieu!” said Athos, “it was hardly worth while to distribute
ourselves for twenty fellows armed with pickaxes, mattocks, and shovels.
Grimaud had only to make them a sign to go away, and I am convinced they
would have left us in peace.”

“I doubt that,” replied d’Artagnan, “for they are advancing very
resolutely. Besides, in addition to the pioneers, there are four
soldiers and a brigadier, armed with muskets.”

“That’s because they don’t see us,” said Athos.

“My faith,” said Aramis, “I must confess I feel a great repugnance to
fire on these poor devils of civilians.”

“He is a bad priest,” said Porthos, “who has pity for heretics.”

“In truth,” said Athos, “Aramis is right. I will warn them.”

“What the devil are you going to do?” cried d’Artagnan, “you will be
shot.”

But Athos heeded not his advice. Mounting on the breach, with his musket
in one hand and his hat in the other, he said, bowing courteously and
addressing the soldiers and the pioneers, who, astonished at this
apparition, stopped fifty paces from the bastion: “Gentlemen, a few
friends and myself are about to breakfast in this bastion. Now, you know
nothing is more disagreeable than being disturbed when one is at
breakfast. We request you, then, if you really have business here, to
wait till we have finished our repast, or to come again a short time
hence; unless, which would be far better, you form the salutary
resolution to quit the side of the rebels, and come and drink with us to
the health of the King of France.”

“Take care, Athos!” cried d’Artagnan; “don’t you see they are aiming?”

“Yes, yes,” said Athos; “but they are only civilians--very bad marksmen,
who will be sure not to hit me.”

In fact, at the same instant four shots were fired, and the balls were
flattened against the wall around Athos, but not one touched him.

Four shots replied to them almost instantaneously, but much better aimed
than those of the aggressors; three soldiers fell dead, and one of the
pioneers was wounded.

“Grimaud,” said Athos, still on the breach, “another musket!”

Grimaud immediately obeyed. On their part, the three friends had
reloaded their arms; a second discharge followed the first. The
brigadier and two pioneers fell dead; the rest of the troop took to
flight.

“Now, gentlemen, a sortie!” cried Athos.

And the four friends rushed out of the fort, gained the field of battle,
picked up the four muskets of the privates and the half-pike of the
brigadier, and convinced that the fugitives would not stop till they
reached the city, turned again toward the bastion, bearing with them the
trophies of their victory.

“Reload the muskets, Grimaud,” said Athos, “and we, gentlemen, will go
on with our breakfast, and resume our conversation. Where were we?”

“I recollect you were saying,” said d’Artagnan, “that after having
demanded my head of the cardinal, Milady had quit the shores of France.
Whither goes she?” added he, strongly interested in the route Milady
followed.

“She goes into England,” said Athos.

“With what view?”

“With the view of assassinating, or causing to be assassinated, the Duke
of Buckingham.”

D’Artagnan uttered an exclamation of surprise and indignation.

“But this is infamous!” cried he.

“As to that,” said Athos, “I beg you to believe that I care very little
about it. Now you have done, Grimaud, take our brigadier’s half-pike,
tie a napkin to it, and plant it on top of our bastion, that these
rebels of Rochellais may see that they have to deal with brave and loyal
soldiers of the king.”

Grimaud obeyed without replying. An instant afterward, the white flag
was floating over the heads of the four friends. A thunder of applause
saluted its appearance; half the camp was at the barrier.

“How?” replied d’Artagnan, “you care little if she kills Buckingham or
causes him to be killed? But the duke is our friend.”

“The duke is English; the duke fights against us. Let her do what she
likes with the duke; I care no more about him than an empty bottle.” And
Athos threw fifteen paces from him an empty bottle from which he had
poured the last drop into his glass.

“A moment,” said d’Artagnan. “I will not abandon Buckingham thus. He
gave us some very fine horses.”

“And moreover, very handsome saddles,” said Porthos, who at the moment
wore on his cloak the lace of his own.

“Besides,” said Aramis, “God desires the conversion and not the death of
a sinner.”

“Amen!” said Athos, “and we will return to that subject later, if such
be your pleasure; but what for the moment engaged my attention most
earnestly, and I am sure you will understand me, d’Artagnan, was the
getting from this woman a kind of carte blanche which she had extorted
from the cardinal, and by means of which she could with impunity get rid
of you and perhaps of us.”

“But this creature must be a demon!” said Porthos, holding out his plate
to Aramis, who was cutting up a fowl.

“And this carte blanche,” said d’Artagnan, “this carte blanche, does it
remain in her hands?”

“No, it passed into mine; I will not say without trouble, for if I did I
should tell a lie.”

“My dear Athos, I shall no longer count the number of times I am
indebted to you for my life.”

“Then it was to go to her that you left us?” said Aramis.

“Exactly.”

“And you have that letter of the cardinal?” said d’Artagnan.

“Here it is,” said Athos; and he took the invaluable paper from the
pocket of his uniform. D’Artagnan unfolded it with one hand, whose
trembling he did not even attempt to conceal, to read:

“Dec. 3, 1627

“It is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of this
has done what he has done.

“RICHELIEU”

“In fact,” said Aramis, “it is an absolution according to rule.”

“That paper must be torn to pieces,” said d’Artagnan, who fancied he
read in it his sentence of death.

“On the contrary,” said Athos, “it must be preserved carefully. I would
not give up this paper if covered with as many gold pieces.”

“And what will she do now?” asked the young man.

“Why,” replied Athos, carelessly, “she is probably going to write to the
cardinal that a damned Musketeer, named Athos, has taken her
safe-conduct from her by force; she will advise him in the same letter
to get rid of his two friends, Aramis and Porthos, at the same time. The
cardinal will remember that these are the same men who have often
crossed his path; and then some fine morning he will arrest d’Artagnan,
and for fear he should feel lonely, he will send us to keep him company
in the Bastille.”

“Go to! It appears to me you make dull jokes, my dear,” said Porthos.

“I do not jest,” said Athos.

“Do you know,” said Porthos, “that to twist that damned Milady’s neck
would be a smaller sin than to twist those of these poor devils of
Huguenots, who have committed no other crime than singing in French the
psalms we sing in Latin?”

“What says the abbe?” asked Athos, quietly.

“I say I am entirely of Porthos’s opinion,” replied Aramis.

“And I, too,” said d’Artagnan.

“Fortunately, she is far off,” said Porthos, “for I confess she would
worry me if she were here.”

“She worries me in England as well as in France,” said Athos.

“She worries me everywhere,” said d’Artagnan.

“But when you held her in your power, why did you not drown her,
strangle her, hang her?” said Porthos. “It is only the dead who do not
return.”

“You think so, Porthos?” replied the Musketeer, with a sad smile which
d’Artagnan alone understood.

“I have an idea,” said d’Artagnan.

“What is it?” said the Musketeers.

“To arms!” cried Grimaud.

The young men sprang up, and seized their muskets.

This time a small troop advanced, consisting of from twenty to
twenty-five men; but they were not pioneers, they were soldiers of the
garrison.

“Shall we return to the camp?” said Porthos. “I don’t think the sides
are equal.”

“Impossible, for three reasons,” replied Athos. “The first, that we have
not finished breakfast; the second, that we still have some very
important things to say; and the third, that it yet wants ten minutes
before the lapse of the hour.”

“Well, then,” said Aramis, “we must form a plan of battle.”

“That’s very simple,” replied Athos. “As soon as the enemy are within
musket shot, we must fire upon them. If they continue to advance, we
must fire again. We must fire as long as we have loaded guns. If those
who remain of the troop persist in coming to the assault, we will allow
the besiegers to get as far as the ditch, and then we will push down
upon their heads that strip of wall which keeps its perpendicular by a
miracle.”

“Bravo!” cried Porthos. “Decidedly, Athos, you were born to be a
general, and the cardinal, who fancies himself a great soldier, is
nothing beside you.”

“Gentlemen,” said Athos, “no divided attention, I beg; let each one pick
out his man.”

“I cover mine,” said d’Artagnan.

“And I mine,” said Porthos.

“And I mine,” said Aramis.

“Fire, then,” said Athos.

The four muskets made but one report, but four men fell.

The drum immediately beat, and the little troop advanced at charging
pace.

Then the shots were repeated without regularity, but always aimed with
the same accuracy. Nevertheless, as if they had been aware of the
numerical weakness of the friends, the Rochellais continued to advance
in quick time.

With every three shots at least two men fell; but the march of those who
remained was not slackened.

Arrived at the foot of the bastion, there were still more than a dozen
of the enemy. A last discharge welcomed them, but did not stop them;
they jumped into the ditch, and prepared to scale the breach.

“Now, my friends,” said Athos, “finish them at a blow. To the wall; to
the wall!”

And the four friends, seconded by Grimaud, pushed with the barrels of
their muskets an enormous sheet of the wall, which bent as if pushed by
the wind, and detaching itself from its base, fell with a horrible crash
into the ditch. Then a fearful crash was heard; a cloud of dust mounted
toward the sky--and all was over!

“Can we have destroyed them all, from the first to the last?” said
Athos.

“My faith, it appears so!” said d’Artagnan.

“No,” cried Porthos; “there go three or four, limping away.”

In fact, three or four of these unfortunate men, covered with dirt and
blood, fled along the hollow way, and at length regained the city. These
were all who were left of the little troop.

Athos looked at his watch.

“Gentlemen,” said he, “we have been here an hour, and our wager is won;
but we will be fair players. Besides, d’Artagnan has not told us his
idea yet.”

And the Musketeer, with his usual coolness, reseated himself before the
remains of the breakfast.

“My idea?” said d’Artagnan.

“Yes; you said you had an idea,” said Athos.

“Oh, I remember,” said d’Artagnan. “Well, I will go to England a second
time; I will go and find Buckingham.”

“You shall not do that, d’Artagnan,” said Athos, coolly.

“And why not? Have I not been there once?”

“Yes; but at that period we were not at war. At that period Buckingham
was an ally, and not an enemy. What you would now do amounts to
treason.”

D’Artagnan perceived the force of this reasoning, and was silent.

“But,” said Porthos, “I think I have an idea, in my turn.”

“Silence for Monsieur Porthos’s idea!” said Aramis.

“I will ask leave of absence of Monsieur de Treville, on some pretext or
other which you must invent; I am not very clever at pretexts. Milady
does not know me; I will get access to her without her suspecting me,
and when I catch my beauty, I will strangle her.”

“Well,” replied Athos, “I am not far from approving the idea of Monsieur
Porthos.”

“For shame!” said Aramis. “Kill a woman? No, listen to me; I have the
true idea.”

“Let us see your idea, Aramis,” said Athos, who felt much deference for
the young Musketeer.

“We must inform the queen.”

“Ah, my faith, yes!” said Porthos and d’Artagnan, at the same time; “we
are coming nearer to it now.”

“Inform the queen!” said Athos; “and how? Have we relations with the
court? Could we send anyone to Paris without its being known in the
camp? From here to Paris it is a hundred and forty leagues; before our
letter was at Angers we should be in a dungeon.”

“As to remitting a letter with safety to her Majesty,” said Aramis,
coloring, “I will take that upon myself. I know a clever person at
Tours--”

Aramis stopped on seeing Athos smile.

“Well, do you not adopt this means, Athos?” said d’Artagnan.

“I do not reject it altogether,” said Athos; “but I wish to remind
Aramis that he cannot quit the camp, and that nobody but one of
ourselves is trustworthy; that two hours after the messenger has set
out, all the Capuchins, all the police, all the black caps of the
cardinal, will know your letter by heart, and you and your clever person
will be arrested.”

“Without reckoning,” objected Porthos, “that the queen would save
Monsieur de Buckingham, but would take no heed of us.”

“Gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, “what Porthos says is full of sense.”

“Ah, ah! but what’s going on in the city yonder?” said Athos.

“They are beating the general alarm.”

The four friends listened, and the sound of the drum plainly reached
them.

“You see, they are going to send a whole regiment against us,” said
Athos.

“You don’t think of holding out against a whole regiment, do you?” said
Porthos.

“Why not?” said the Musketeer. “I feel myself quite in a humor for it;
and I would hold out before an army if we had taken the precaution to
bring a dozen more bottles of wine.”

“Upon my word, the drum draws near,” said d’Artagnan.

“Let it come,” said Athos. “It is a quarter of an hour’s journey from
here to the city, consequently a quarter of an hour’s journey from the
city to hither. That is more than time enough for us to devise a plan.
If we go from this place we shall never find another so suitable. Ah,
stop! I have it, gentlemen; the right idea has just occurred to me.”

“Tell us.”

“Allow me to give Grimaud some indispensable orders.”

Athos made a sign for his lackey to approach.

“Grimaud,” said Athos, pointing to the bodies which lay under the wall
of the bastion, “take those gentlemen, set them up against the wall, put
their hats upon their heads, and their guns in their hands.”

“Oh, the great man!” cried d’Artagnan. “I comprehend now.”

“You comprehend?” said Porthos.

“And do you comprehend, Grimaud?” said Aramis.

Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative.

“That’s all that is necessary,” said Athos; “now for my idea.”

“I should like, however, to comprehend,” said Porthos.

“That is useless.”

“Yes, yes! Athos’s idea!” cried Aramis and d’Artagnan, at the same time.

“This Milady, this woman, this creature, this demon, has a
brother-in-law, as I think you told me, d’Artagnan?”

“Yes, I know him very well; and I also believe that he has not a very
warm affection for his sister-in-law.”

“There is no harm in that. If he detested her, it would be all the
better,” replied Athos.

“In that case we are as well off as we wish.”

“And yet,” said Porthos, “I would like to know what Grimaud is about.”

“Silence, Porthos!” said Aramis.

“What is her brother-in-law’s name?”

“Lord de Winter.”

“Where is he now?”

“He returned to London at the first sound of war.”

“Well, there’s just the man we want,” said Athos. “It is he whom we must
warn. We will have him informed that his sister-in-law is on the point
of having someone assassinated, and beg him not to lose sight of her.
There is in London, I hope, some establishment like that of the
Magdalens, or of the Repentant Daughters. He must place his sister in
one of these, and we shall be in peace.”

“Yes,” said d’Artagnan, “till she comes out.”

“Ah, my faith!” said Athos, “you require too much, d’Artagnan. I have
given you all I have, and I beg leave to tell you that this is the
bottom of my sack.”

“But I think it would be still better,” said Aramis, “to inform the
queen and Lord de Winter at the same time.”

“Yes; but who is to carry the letter to Tours, and who to London?”

“I answer for Bazin,” said Aramis.

“And I for Planchet,” said d’Artagnan.

“Ay,” said Porthos, “if we cannot leave the camp, our lackeys may.”

“To be sure they may; and this very day we will write the letters,” said
Aramis. “Give the lackeys money, and they will start.”

“We will give them money?” replied Athos. “Have you any money?”

The four friends looked at one another, and a cloud came over the brows
which but lately had been so cheerful.

“Look out!” cried d’Artagnan, “I see black points and red points moving
yonder. Why did you talk of a regiment, Athos? It is a veritable army!”

“My faith, yes,” said Athos; “there they are. See the sneaks come,
without drum or trumpet. Ah, ah! have you finished, Grimaud?”

Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative, and pointed to a dozen bodies
which he had set up in the most picturesque attitudes. Some carried
arms, others seemed to be taking aim, and the remainder appeared merely
to be sword in hand.

“Bravo!” said Athos; “that does honor to your imagination.”

“All very well,” said Porthos, “but I should like to understand.”

“Let us decamp first, and you will understand afterward.”

“A moment, gentlemen, a moment; give Grimaud time to clear away the
breakfast.”

“Ah, ah!” said Aramis, “the black points and the red points are visibly
enlarging. I am of d’Artagnan’s opinion; we have no time to lose in
regaining our camp.”

“My faith,” said Athos, “I have nothing to say against a retreat. We bet
upon one hour, and we have stayed an hour and a half. Nothing can be
said; let us be off, gentlemen, let us be off!”

Grimaud was already ahead, with the basket and the dessert. The four
friends followed, ten paces behind him.

“What the devil shall we do now, gentlemen?” cried Athos.

“Have you forgotten anything?” said Aramis.

“The white flag, morbleu! We must not leave a flag in the hands of the
enemy, even if that flag be but a napkin.”

And Athos ran back to the bastion, mounted the platform, and bore off
the flag; but as the Rochellais had arrived within musket range, they
opened a terrible fire upon this man, who appeared to expose himself for
pleasure’s sake.

But Athos might be said to bear a charmed life. The balls passed and
whistled all around him; not one struck him.

Athos waved his flag, turning his back on the guards of the city, and
saluting those of the camp. On both sides loud cries arose--on the one
side cries of anger, on the other cries of enthusiasm.

A second discharge followed the first, and three balls, by passing
through it, made the napkin really a flag. Cries were heard from the
camp, “Come down! come down!”

Athos came down; his friends, who anxiously awaited him, saw him
returned with joy.

“Come along, Athos, come along!” cried d’Artagnan; “now we have found
everything except money, it would be stupid to be killed.”

But Athos continued to march majestically, whatever remarks his
companions made; and they, finding their remarks useless, regulated
their pace by his.

Grimaud and his basket were far in advance, out of the range of the
balls.

At the end of an instant they heard a furious fusillade.

“What’s that?” asked Porthos, “what are they firing at now? I hear no
balls whistle, and I see nobody!”

“They are firing at the corpses,” replied Athos.

“But the dead cannot return their fire.”

“Certainly not! They will then fancy it is an ambuscade, they will
deliberate; and by the time they have found out the pleasantry, we shall
be out of the range of their balls. That renders it useless to get a
pleurisy by too much haste.”

“Oh, I comprehend now,” said the astonished Porthos.

“That’s lucky,” said Athos, shrugging his shoulders.

On their part, the French, on seeing the four friends return at such a
step, uttered cries of enthusiasm.

At length a fresh discharge was heard, and this time the balls came
rattling among the stones around the four friends, and whistling sharply
in their ears. The Rochellais had at last taken possession of the
bastion.

“These Rochellais are bungling fellows,” said Athos; “how many have we
killed of them--a dozen?”

“Or fifteen.”

“How many did we crush under the wall?”

“Eight or ten.”

“And in exchange for all that not even a scratch! Ah, but what is the
matter with your hand, d’Artagnan? It bleeds, seemingly.”

“Oh, it’s nothing,” said d’Artagnan.

“A spent ball?”

“Not even that.”

“What is it, then?”

We have said that Athos loved d’Artagnan like a child, and this somber
and inflexible personage felt the anxiety of a parent for the young man.

“Only grazed a little,” replied d’Artagnan; “my fingers were caught
between two stones--that of the wall and that of my ring--and the skin
was broken.”

“That comes of wearing diamonds, my master,” said Athos, disdainfully.

“Ah, to be sure,” cried Porthos, “there is a diamond. Why the devil,
then, do we plague ourselves about money, when there is a diamond?”

“Stop a bit!” said Aramis.

“Well thought of, Porthos; this time you have an idea.”

“Undoubtedly,” said Porthos, drawing himself up at Athos’s compliment;
“as there is a diamond, let us sell it.”

“But,” said d’Artagnan, “it is the queen’s diamond.”

“The stronger reason why it should be sold,” replied Athos. “The queen
saving Monsieur de Buckingham, her lover; nothing more just. The queen
saving us, her friends; nothing more moral. Let us sell the diamond.
What says Monsieur the Abbe? I don’t ask Porthos; his opinion has been
given.”

“Why, I think,” said Aramis, blushing as usual, “that his ring not
coming from a mistress, and consequently not being a love token,
d’Artagnan may sell it.”

“My dear Aramis, you speak like theology personified. Your advice, then,
is--”

“To sell the diamond,” replied Aramis.

“Well, then,” said d’Artagnan, gaily, “let us sell the diamond, and say
no more about it.”

The fusillade continued; but the four friends were out of reach, and the
Rochellais only fired to appease their consciences.

“My faith, it was time that idea came into Porthos’s head. Here we are
at the camp; therefore, gentlemen, not a word more of this affair. We
are observed; they are coming to meet us. We shall be carried in
triumph.”

In fact, as we have said, the whole camp was in motion. More than two
thousand persons had assisted, as at a spectacle, in this fortunate but
wild undertaking of the four friends--an undertaking of which they were
far from suspecting the real motive. Nothing was heard but cries of
“Live the Musketeers! Live the Guards!” M. de Busigny was the first to
come and shake Athos by the hand, and acknowledge that the wager was
lost. The dragoon and the Swiss followed him, and all their comrades
followed the dragoon and the Swiss. There was nothing but felicitations,
pressures of the hand, and embraces; there was no end to the
inextinguishable laughter at the Rochellais. The tumult at length became
so great that the cardinal fancied there must be some riot, and sent La
Houdiniere, his captain of the Guards, to inquire what was going on.

The affair was described to the messenger with all the effervescence of
enthusiasm.

“Well?” asked the cardinal, on seeing La Houdiniere return.

“Well, monseigneur,” replied the latter, “three Musketeers and a
Guardsman laid a wager with Monsieur de Busigny that they would go and
breakfast in the bastion St. Gervais; and while breakfasting they held
it for two hours against the enemy, and have killed I don’t know how
many Rochellais.”

“Did you inquire the names of those three Musketeers?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“What are their names?”

“Messieurs Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.”

“Still my three brave fellows!” murmured the cardinal. “And the
Guardsman?”

“d’Artagnan.”

“Still my young scapegrace. Positively, these four men must be on my
side.”

The same evening the cardinal spoke to M. de Treville of the exploit of
the morning, which was the talk of the whole camp. M. de Treville, who
had received the account of the adventure from the mouths of the heroes
of it, related it in all its details to his Eminence, not forgetting the
episode of the napkin.

“That’s well, Monsieur de Treville,” said the cardinal; “pray let that
napkin be sent to me. I will have three fleur-de-lis embroidered on it
in gold, and will give it to your company as a standard.”

“Monseigneur,” said M. de Treville, “that will be unjust to the
Guardsmen. Monsieur d’Artagnan is not with me; he serves under Monsieur
Dessessart.”

“Well, then, take him,” said the cardinal; “when four men are so much
attached to one another, it is only fair that they should serve in the
same company.”

That same evening M. de Treville announced this good news to the three
Musketeers and d’Artagnan, inviting all four to breakfast with him next
morning.

D’Artagnan was beside himself with joy. We know that the dream of his
life had been to become a Musketeer. The three friends were likewise
greatly delighted.

“My faith,” said d’Artagnan to Athos, “you had a triumphant idea! As you
said, we have acquired glory, and were enabled to carry on a
conversation of the highest importance.”

“Which we can resume now without anybody suspecting us, for, with the
help of God, we shall henceforth pass for cardinalists.”

That evening d’Artagnan went to present his respects to M. Dessessart,
and inform him of his promotion.

M Dessessart, who esteemed d’Artagnan, made him offers of help, as this
change would entail expenses for equipment.

D’Artagnan refused; but thinking the opportunity a good one, he begged
him to have the diamond he put into his hand valued, as he wished to
turn it into money.

The next day, M. Dessessart’s valet came to d’Artagnan’s lodging, and
gave him a bag containing seven thousand livres.

This was the price of the queen’s diamond.




48 A FAMILY AFFAIR


Athos had invented the phrase, family affair. A family affair was not
subject to the investigation of the cardinal; a family affair concerned
nobody. People might employ themselves in a family affair before all the
world. Therefore Athos had invented the phrase, family affair.

Aramis had discovered the idea, the lackeys.

Porthos had discovered the means, the diamond.

D’Artagnan alone had discovered nothing--he, ordinarily the most
inventive of the four; but it must be also said that the very name of
Milady paralyzed him.

Ah! no, we were mistaken; he had discovered a purchaser for his diamond.

The breakfast at M. de Treville’s was as gay and cheerful as possible.
D’Artagnan already wore his uniform--for being nearly of the same size
as Aramis, and as Aramis was so liberally paid by the publisher who
purchased his poem as to allow him to buy everything double, he sold his
friend a complete outfit.

D’Artagnan would have been at the height of his wishes if he had not
constantly seen Milady like a dark cloud hovering in the horizon.

After breakfast, it was agreed that they should meet again in the
evening at Athos’s lodging, and there finish their plans.

D’Artagnan passed the day in exhibiting his Musketeer’s uniform in every
street of the camp.

In the evening, at the appointed hour, the four friends met. There only
remained three things to decide--what they should write to Milady’s
brother; what they should write to the clever person at Tours; and which
should be the lackeys to carry the letters.

Everyone offered his own. Athos talked of the discretion of Grimaud, who
never spoke a word but when his master unlocked his mouth. Porthos
boasted of the strength of Mousqueton, who was big enough to thrash four
men of ordinary size. Aramis, confiding in the address of Bazin, made a
pompous eulogium on his candidate. Finally, d’Artagnan had entire faith
in the bravery of Planchet, and reminded them of the manner in which he
had conducted himself in the ticklish affair of Boulogne.

These four virtues disputed the prize for a length of time, and gave
birth to magnificent speeches which we do not repeat here for fear they
should be deemed too long.

“Unfortunately,” said Athos, “he whom we send must possess in himself
alone the four qualities united.”

“But where is such a lackey to be found?”

“Not to be found!” cried Athos. “I know it well, so take Grimaud.”

“Take Mousqueton.”

“Take Bazin.”

“Take Planchet. Planchet is brave and shrewd; they are two qualities out
of the four.”

“Gentlemen,” said Aramis, “the principal question is not to know which
of our four lackeys is the most discreet, the most strong, the most
clever, or the most brave; the principal thing is to know which loves
money the best.”

“What Aramis says is very sensible,” replied Athos; “we must speculate
upon the faults of people, and not upon their virtues. Monsieur Abbe,
you are a great moralist.”

“Doubtless,” said Aramis, “for we not only require to be well served in
order to succeed, but moreover, not to fail; for in case of failure,
heads are in question, not for our lackeys--”

“Speak lower, Aramis,” said Athos.

“That’s wise--not for the lackeys,” resumed Aramis, “but for the
master--for the masters, we may say. Are our lackeys sufficiently
devoted to us to risk their lives for us? No.”

“My faith,” said d’Artagnan. “I would almost answer for Planchet.”

“Well, my dear friend, add to his natural devotedness a good sum of
money, and then, instead of answering for him once, answer for him
twice.”

“Why, good God! you will be deceived just the same,” said Athos, who was
an optimist when things were concerned, and a pessimist when men were in
question. “They will promise everything for the sake of the money, and
on the road fear will prevent them from acting. Once taken, they will be
pressed; when pressed, they will confess everything. What the devil! we
are not children. To reach England”--Athos lowered his voice--“all
France, covered with spies and creatures of the cardinal, must be
crossed. A passport for embarkation must be obtained; and the party must
be acquainted with English in order to ask the way to London. Really, I
think the thing very difficult.”

“Not at all,” cried d’Artagnan, who was anxious the matter should be
accomplished; “on the contrary, I think it very easy. It would be, no
doubt, parbleu, if we write to Lord de Winter about affairs of vast
importance, of the horrors of the cardinal--”

“Speak lower!” said Athos.

“--of intrigues and secrets of state,” continued d’Artagnan, complying
with the recommendation. “There can be no doubt we would all be broken
on the wheel; but for God’s sake, do not forget, as you yourself said,
Athos, that we only write to him concerning a family affair; that we
only write to him to entreat that as soon as Milady arrives in London he
will put it out of her power to injure us. I will write to him, then,
nearly in these terms.”

“Let us see,” said Athos, assuming in advance a critical look.

“Monsieur and dear friend--”

“Ah, yes! Dear friend to an Englishman,” interrupted Athos; “well
commenced! Bravo, d’Artagnan! Only with that word you would be quartered
instead of being broken on the wheel.”

“Well, perhaps. I will say, then, Monsieur, quite short.”

“You may even say, My Lord,” replied Athos, who stickled for propriety.

“My Lord, do you remember the little goat pasture of the Luxembourg?”

“Good, the Luxembourg! One might believe this is an allusion to the
queen-mother! That’s ingenious,” said Athos.

“Well, then, we will put simply, My Lord, do you remember a certain
little enclosure where your life was spared?”

“My dear d’Artagnan, you will never make anything but a very bad
secretary. Where your life was spared! For shame! that’s unworthy. A man
of spirit is not to be reminded of such services. A benefit reproached
is an offense committed.”

“The devil!” said d’Artagnan, “you are insupportable. If the letter must
be written under your censure, my faith, I renounce the task.”

“And you will do right. Handle the musket and the sword, my dear fellow.
You will come off splendidly at those two exercises; but pass the pen
over to Monsieur Abbe. That’s his province.”

“Ay, ay!” said Porthos; “pass the pen to Aramis, who writes theses in
Latin.”

“Well, so be it,” said d’Artagnan. “Draw up this note for us, Aramis;
but by our Holy Father the Pope, cut it short, for I shall prune you in
my turn, I warn you.”

“I ask no better,” said Aramis, with that ingenious air of confidence
which every poet has in himself; “but let me be properly acquainted with
the subject. I have heard here and there that this sister-in-law was a
hussy. I have obtained proof of it by listening to her conversation with
the cardinal.”

“Lower! SACRE BLEU!” said Athos.

“But,” continued Aramis, “the details escape me.”

“And me also,” said Porthos.

D’Artagnan and Athos looked at each other for some time in silence. At
length Athos, after serious reflection and becoming more pale than
usual, made a sign of assent to d’Artagnan, who by it understood he was
at liberty to speak.

“Well, this is what you have to say,” said d’Artagnan: “My Lord, your
sister-in-law is an infamous woman, who wished to have you killed that
she might inherit your wealth; but she could not marry your brother,
being already married in France, and having been--” d’Artagnan stopped,
as if seeking for the word, and looked at Athos.

“Repudiated by her husband,” said Athos.

“Because she had been branded,” continued d’Artagnan.

“Bah!” cried Porthos. “Impossible! What do you say--that she wanted to
have her brother-in-law killed?”

“Yes.”

“She was married?” asked Aramis.

“Yes.”

“And her husband found out that she had a fleur-de-lis on her shoulder?”
cried Porthos.

“Yes.”

These three yeses had been pronounced by Athos, each with a sadder
intonation.

“And who has seen this fleur-de-lis?” inquired Aramis.

“d’Artagnan and I. Or rather, to observe the chronological order, I and
d’Artagnan,” replied Athos.

“And does the husband of this frightful creature still live?” said
Aramis.

“He still lives.”

“Are you quite sure of it?”

“I am he.”

There was a moment of cold silence, during which everyone was affected
according to his nature.

“This time,” said Athos, first breaking the silence, “d’Artagnan has
given us an excellent program, and the letter must be written at once.”

“The devil! You are right, Athos,” said Aramis; “and it is a rather
difficult matter. The chancellor himself would be puzzled how to write
such a letter, and yet the chancellor draws up an official report very
readily. Never mind! Be silent, I will write.”

Aramis accordingly took the quill, reflected for a few moments, wrote
eight or ten lines in a charming little female hand, and then with a
voice soft and slow, as if each word had been scrupulously weighed, he
read the following:

“My Lord, The person who writes these few lines had the honor of
crossing swords with you in the little enclosure of the Rue d’Enfer. As
you have several times since declared yourself the friend of that
person, he thinks it his duty to respond to that friendship by sending
you important information. Twice you have nearly been the victim of a
near relative, whom you believe to be your heir because you are ignorant
that before she contracted a marriage in England she was already married
in France. But the third time, which is the present, you may succumb.
Your relative left La Rochelle for England during the night. Watch her
arrival, for she has great and terrible projects. If you require to know
positively what she is capable of, read her past history on her left
shoulder.”

“Well, now that will do wonderfully well,” said Athos. “My dear Aramis,
you have the pen of a secretary of state. Lord de Winter will now be
upon his guard if the letter should reach him; and even if it should
fall into the hands of the cardinal, we shall not be compromised. But as
the lackey who goes may make us believe he has been to London and may
stop at Chatellerault, let us give him only half the sum promised him,
with the letter, with an agreement that he shall have the other half in
exchange for the reply. Have you the diamond?” continued Athos.

“I have what is still better. I have the price;” and d’Artagnan threw
the bag upon the table. At the sound of the gold Aramis raised his eyes
and Porthos started. As to Athos, he remained unmoved.

“How much in that little bag?”

“Seven thousand livres, in louis of twelve francs.”

“Seven thousand livres!” cried Porthos. “That poor little diamond was
worth seven thousand livres?”

“It appears so,” said Athos, “since here they are. I don’t suppose that
our friend d’Artagnan has added any of his own to the amount.”

“But, gentlemen, in all this,” said d’Artagnan, “we do not think of the
queen. Let us take some heed of the welfare of her dear Buckingham. That
is the least we owe her.”

“That’s true,” said Athos; “but that concerns Aramis.”

“Well,” replied the latter, blushing, “what must I say?”

“Oh, that’s simple enough!” replied Athos. “Write a second letter for
that clever personage who lives at Tours.”

Aramis resumed his pen, reflected a little, and wrote the following
lines, which he immediately submitted to the approbation of his friends.

“My dear cousin.”

“Ah, ah!” said Athos. “This clever person is your relative, then?”

“Cousin-german.”

“Go on, to your cousin, then!”

Aramis continued:

“My dear Cousin, His Eminence, the cardinal, whom God preserve for the
happiness of France and the confusion of the enemies of the kingdom, is
on the point of putting an end to the hectic rebellion of La Rochelle.
It is probable that the succor of the English fleet will never even
arrive in sight of the place. I will even venture to say that I am
certain M. de Buckingham will be prevented from setting out by some
great event. His Eminence is the most illustrious politician of times
past, of times present, and probably of times to come. He would
extinguish the sun if the sun incommoded him. Give these happy tidings
to your sister, my dear cousin. I have dreamed that the unlucky
Englishman was dead. I cannot recollect whether it was by steel or by
poison; only of this I am sure, I have dreamed he was dead, and you know
my dreams never deceive me. Be assured, then, of seeing me soon return.”

“Capital!” cried Athos; “you are the king of poets, my dear Aramis. You
speak like the Apocalypse, and you are as true as the Gospel. There is
nothing now to do but to put the address to this letter.”

“That is easily done,” said Aramis.

He folded the letter fancifully, and took up his pen and wrote:

“To Mlle. Michon, seamstress, Tours.”

The three friends looked at one another and laughed; they were caught.

“Now,” said Aramis, “you will please to understand, gentlemen, that
Bazin alone can carry this letter to Tours. My cousin knows nobody but
Bazin, and places confidence in nobody but him; any other person would
fail. Besides, Bazin is ambitious and learned; Bazin has read history,
gentlemen, he knows that Sixtus the Fifth became Pope after having kept
pigs. Well, as he means to enter the Church at the same time as myself,
he does not despair of becoming Pope in his turn, or at least a
cardinal. You can understand that a man who has such views will never
allow himself to be taken, or if taken, will undergo martyrdom rather
than speak.”

“Very well,” said d’Artagnan, “I consent to Bazin with all my heart, but
grant me Planchet. Milady had him one day turned out of doors, with
sundry blows of a good stick to accelerate his motions. Now, Planchet
has an excellent memory; and I will be bound that sooner than relinquish
any possible means of vengeance, he will allow himself to be beaten to
death. If your arrangements at Tours are your arrangements, Aramis,
those of London are mine. I request, then, that Planchet may be chosen,
more particularly as he has already been to London with me, and knows
how to speak correctly: London, sir, if you please, and my master, Lord
d’Artagnan. With that you may be satisfied he can make his way, both
going and returning.”

“In that case,” said Athos, “Planchet must receive seven hundred livres
for going, and seven hundred livres for coming back; and Bazin, three
hundred livres for going, and three hundred livres for returning--that
will reduce the sum to five thousand livres. We will each take a
thousand livres to be employed as seems good, and we will leave a fund
of a thousand livres under the guardianship of Monsieur Abbe here, for
extraordinary occasions or common wants. Will that do?”

“My dear Athos,” said Aramis, “you speak like Nestor, who was, as
everyone knows, the wisest among the Greeks.”

“Well, then,” said Athos, “it is agreed. Planchet and Bazin shall go.
Everything considered, I am not sorry to retain Grimaud; he is
accustomed to my ways, and I am particular. Yesterday’s affair must have
shaken him a little; his voyage would upset him quite.”

Planchet was sent for, and instructions were given him. The matter had
been named to him by d’Artagnan, who in the first place pointed out the
money to him, then the glory, and then the danger.

“I will carry the letter in the lining of my coat,” said Planchet; “and
if I am taken I will swallow it.”

“Well, but then you will not be able to fulfill your commission,” said
d’Artagnan.

“You will give me a copy this evening, which I shall know by heart
tomorrow.”

D’Artagnan looked at his friends, as if to say, “Well, what did I tell
you?”

“Now,” continued he, addressing Planchet, “you have eight days to get an
interview with Lord de Winter; you have eight days to return--in all
sixteen days. If, on the sixteenth day after your departure, at eight
o’clock in the evening you are not here, no money--even if it be but
five minutes past eight.”

“Then, monsieur,” said Planchet, “you must buy me a watch.”

“Take this,” said Athos, with his usual careless generosity, giving him
his own, “and be a good lad. Remember, if you talk, if you babble, if
you get drunk, you risk your master’s head, who has so much confidence
in your fidelity, and who answers for you. But remember, also, that if
by your fault any evil happens to d’Artagnan, I will find you, wherever
you may be, for the purpose of ripping up your belly.”

“Oh, monsieur!” said Planchet, humiliated by the suspicion, and
moreover, terrified at the calm air of the Musketeer.

“And I,” said Porthos, rolling his large eyes, “remember, I will skin
you alive.”

“Ah, monsieur!”

“And I,” said Aramis, with his soft, melodius voice, “remember that I
will roast you at a slow fire, like a savage.”

“Ah, monsieur!”

Planchet began to weep. We will not venture to say whether it was from
terror created by the threats or from tenderness at seeing four friends
so closely united.

D’Artagnan took his hand. “See, Planchet,” said he, “these gentlemen
only say this out of affection for me, but at bottom they all like you.”

“Ah, monsieur,” said Planchet, “I will succeed or I will consent to be
cut in quarters; and if they do cut me in quarters, be assured that not
a morsel of me will speak.”

It was decided that Planchet should set out the next day, at eight
o’clock in the morning, in order, as he had said, that he might during
the night learn the letter by heart. He gained just twelve hours by this
engagement; he was to be back on the sixteenth day, by eight o’clock in
the evening.

In the morning, as he was mounting his horse, d’Artagnan, who felt at
the bottom of his heart a partiality for the duke, took Planchet aside.

“Listen,” said he to him. “When you have given the letter to Lord de
Winter and he has read it, you will further say to him: Watch over his
Grace Lord Buckingham, for they wish to assassinate him. But this,
Planchet, is so serious and important that I have not informed my
friends that I would entrust this secret to you; and for a captain’s
commission I would not write it.”

“Be satisfied, monsieur,” said Planchet, “you shall see if confidence
can be placed in me.”

Mounted on an excellent horse, which he was to leave at the end of
twenty leagues in order to take the post, Planchet set off at a gallop,
his spirits a little depressed by the triple promise made him by the
Musketeers, but otherwise as light-hearted as possible.

Bazin set out the next day for Tours, and was allowed eight days for
performing his commission.

The four friends, during the period of these two absences, had, as may
well be supposed, the eye on the watch, the nose to the wind, and the
ear on the hark. Their days were passed in endeavoring to catch all that
was said, in observing the proceeding of the cardinal, and in looking
out for all the couriers who arrived. More than once an involuntary
trembling seized them when called upon for some unexpected service. They
had, besides, to look constantly to their own proper safety; Milady was
a phantom which, when it had once appeared to people, did not allow them
to sleep very quietly.

On the morning of the eighth day, Bazin, fresh as ever, and smiling,
according to custom, entered the cabaret of the Parpaillot as the four
friends were sitting down to breakfast, saying, as had been agreed upon:
“Monsieur Aramis, the answer from your cousin.”

The four friends exchanged a joyful glance; half of the work was done.
It is true, however, that it was the shorter and easier part.

Aramis, blushing in spite of himself, took the letter, which was in a
large, coarse hand and not particular for its orthography.

“Good God!” cried he, laughing, “I quite despair of my poor Michon; she
will never write like Monsieur de Voiture.”

“What does you mean by boor Michon?” said the Swiss, who was chatting
with the four friends when the letter came.

“Oh, pardieu, less than nothing,” said Aramis; “a charming little
seamstress, whom I love dearly and from whose hand I requested a few
lines as a sort of keepsake.”

“The duvil!” said the Swiss, “if she is as great a lady as her writing
is large, you are a lucky fellow, gomrade!”

Aramis read the letter, and passed it to Athos.

“See what she writes to me, Athos,” said he.

Athos cast a glance over the epistle, and to disperse all the suspicions
that might have been created, read aloud:

“My cousin,

“My sister and I are skillful in interpreting dreams, and even entertain
great fear of them; but of yours it may be said, I hope, every dream is
an illusion. Adieu! Take care of yourself, and act so that we may from
time to time hear you spoken of.

“MARIE MICHON”

“And what dream does she mean?” asked the dragoon, who had approached
during the reading.

“Yez; what’s the dream?” said the Swiss.

“Well, pardieu!” said Aramis, “it was only this: I had a dream, and I
related it to her.”

“Yez, yez,” said the Swiss; “it’s simple enough to dell a dream, but I
neffer dream.”

“You are very fortunate,” said Athos, rising; “I wish I could say as
much!”

“Neffer,” replied the Swiss, enchanted that a man like Athos could envy
him anything. “Neffer, neffer!”

D’Artagnan, seeing Athos rise, did likewise, took his arm, and went out.

Porthos and Aramis remained behind to encounter the jokes of the dragoon
and the Swiss.

As to Bazin, he went and lay down on a truss of straw; and as he had
more imagination than the Swiss, he dreamed that Aramis, having become
pope, adorned his head with a cardinal’s hat.

But, as we have said, Bazin had not, by his fortunate return, removed
more than a part of the uneasiness which weighed upon the four friends.
The days of expectation are long, and d’Artagnan, in particular, would
have wagered that the days were forty-four hours. He forgot the
necessary slowness of navigation; he exaggerated to himself the power of
Milady. He credited this woman, who appeared to him the equal of a
demon, with agents as supernatural as herself; at the least noise, he
imagined himself about to be arrested, and that Planchet was being
brought back to be confronted with himself and his friends. Still
further, his confidence in the worthy Picard, at one time so great,
diminished day by day. This anxiety became so great that it even
extended to Aramis and Porthos. Athos alone remained unmoved, as if no
danger hovered over him, and as if he breathed his customary atmosphere.

On the sixteenth day, in particular, these signs were so strong in
d’Artagnan and his two friends that they could not remain quiet in one
place, and wandered about like ghosts on the road by which Planchet was
expected.

“Really,” said Athos to them, “you are not men but children, to let a
woman terrify you so! And what does it amount to, after all? To be
imprisoned. Well, but we should be taken out of prison; Madame Bonacieux
was released. To be decapitated? Why, every day in the trenches we go
cheerfully to expose ourselves to worse than that--for a bullet may
break a leg, and I am convinced a surgeon would give us more pain in
cutting off a thigh than an executioner in cutting off a head. Wait
quietly, then; in two hours, in four, in six hours at latest, Planchet
will be here. He promised to be here, and I have very great faith in
Planchet, who appears to me to be a very good lad.”

“But if he does not come?” said d’Artagnan.

“Well, if he does not come, it will be because he has been delayed,
that’s all. He may have fallen from his horse, he may have cut a caper
from the deck; he may have traveled so fast against the wind as to have
brought on a violent catarrh. Eh, gentlemen, let us reckon upon
accidents! Life is a chaplet of little miseries which the philosopher
counts with a smile. Be philosophers, as I am, gentlemen; sit down at
the table and let us drink. Nothing makes the future look so bright as
surveying it through a glass of chambertin.”

“That’s all very well,” replied d’Artagnan; “but I am tired of fearing
when I open a fresh bottle that the wine may come from the cellar of
Milady.”

“You are very fastidious,” said Athos; “such a beautiful woman!”

“A woman of mark!” said Porthos, with his loud laugh.

Athos started, passed his hand over his brow to remove the drops of
perspiration that burst forth, and rose in his turn with a nervous
movement he could not repress.

The day, however, passed away; and the evening came on slowly, but
finally it came. The bars were filled with drinkers. Athos, who had
pocketed his share of the diamond, seldom quit the Parpaillot. He had
found in M. de Busigny, who, by the by, had given them a magnificent
dinner, a partner worthy of his company. They were playing together, as
usual, when seven o’clock sounded; the patrol was heard passing to
double the posts. At half past seven the retreat was sounded.

“We are lost,” said d’Artagnan, in the ear of Athos.

“You mean to say we have lost,” said Athos, quietly, drawing four
pistoles from his pocket and throwing them upon the table. “Come,
gentlemen,” said he, “they are beating the tattoo. Let us to bed!”

And Athos went out of the Parpaillot, followed by d’Artagnan. Aramis
came behind, giving his arm to Porthos. Aramis mumbled verses to
himself, and Porthos from time to time pulled a hair or two from his
mustache, in sign of despair.

But all at once a shadow appeared in the darkness the outline of which
was familiar to d’Artagnan, and a well-known voice said, “Monsieur, I
have brought your cloak; it is chilly this evening.”

“Planchet!” cried d’Artagnan, beside himself with joy.

“Planchet!” repeated Aramis and Porthos.

“Well, yes, Planchet, to be sure,” said Athos, “what is there so
astonishing in that? He promised to be back by eight o’clock, and eight
is striking. Bravo, Planchet, you are a lad of your word, and if ever
you leave your master, I will promise you a place in my service.”

“Oh, no, never,” said Planchet, “I will never leave Monsieur
d’Artagnan.”

At the same time d’Artagnan felt that Planchet slipped a note into his
hand.

D’Artagnan felt a strong inclination to embrace Planchet as he had
embraced him on his departure; but he feared lest this mark of
affection, bestowed upon his lackey in the open street, might appear
extraordinary to passers-by, and he restrained himself.

“I have the note,” said he to Athos and to his friends.

“That’s well,” said Athos, “let us go home and read it.”

The note burned the hand of d’Artagnan. He wished to hasten their steps;
but Athos took his arm and passed it under his own, and the young man
was forced to regulate his pace by that of his friend.

At length they reached the tent, lit a lamp, and while Planchet stood at
the entrance that the four friends might not be surprised, d’Artagnan,
with a trembling hand, broke the seal and opened the so anxiously
expected letter.

It contained half a line, in a hand perfectly British, and with a
conciseness as perfectly Spartan:

Thank you; be easy.

d’Artagnan translated this for the others.

Athos took the letter from the hands of d’Artagnan, approached the lamp,
set fire to the paper, and did not let go till it was reduced to a
cinder.

Then, calling Planchet, he said, “Now, my lad, you may claim your seven
hundred livres, but you did not run much risk with such a note as that.”

“I am not to blame for having tried every means to compress it,” said
Planchet.

“Well!” cried d’Artagnan, “tell us all about it.”

“Dame, that’s a long job, monsieur.”

“You are right, Planchet,” said Athos; “besides, the tattoo has been
sounded, and we should be observed if we kept a light burning much
longer than the others.”

“So be it,” said d’Artagnan. “Go to bed, Planchet, and sleep soundly.”

“My faith, monsieur! that will be the first time I have done so for
sixteen days.”

“And me, too!” said d’Artagnan.

“And me, too!” said Porthos.

“And me, too!” said Aramis.

“Well, if you will have the truth, and me, too!” said Athos.




49 FATALITY


Meantime Milady, drunk with passion, roaring on the deck like a lioness
that has been embarked, had been tempted to throw herself into the sea
that she might regain the coast, for she could not get rid of the
thought that she had been insulted by d’Artagnan, threatened by Athos,
and that she had quit France without being revenged on them. This idea
soon became so insupportable to her that at the risk of whatever
terrible consequences might result to herself from it, she implored the
captain to put her on shore; but the captain, eager to escape from his
false position--placed between French and English cruisers, like the bat
between the mice and the birds--was in great haste to regain England,
and positively refused to obey what he took for a woman’s caprice,
promising his passenger, who had been particularly recommended to him by
the cardinal, to land her, if the sea and the French permitted him, at
one of the ports of Brittany, either at Lorient or Brest. But the wind
was contrary, the sea bad; they tacked and kept offshore. Nine days
after leaving the Charente, pale with fatigue and vexation, Milady saw
only the blue coasts of Finisterre appear.

She calculated that to cross this corner of France and return to the
cardinal it would take her at least three days. Add another day for
landing, and that would make four. Add these four to the nine others,
that would be thirteen days lost--thirteen days, during which so many
important events might pass in London. She reflected likewise that the
cardinal would be furious at her return, and consequently would be more
disposed to listen to the complaints brought against her than to the
accusations she brought against others.

She allowed the vessel to pass Lorient and Brest without repeating her
request to the captain, who, on his part, took care not to remind her of
it. Milady therefore continued her voyage, and on the very day that
Planchet embarked at Portsmouth for France, the messenger of his
Eminence entered the port in triumph.

All the city was agitated by an extraordinary movement. Four large
vessels, recently built, had just been launched. At the end of the
jetty, his clothes richly laced with gold, glittering, as was customary
with him, with diamonds and precious stones, his hat ornamented with a
white feather which drooped upon his shoulder, Buckingham was seen
surrounded by a staff almost as brilliant as himself.

It was one of those rare and beautiful days in winter when England
remembers that there is a sun. The star of day, pale but nevertheless
still splendid, was setting in the horizon, glorifying at once the
heavens and the sea with bands of fire, and casting upon the towers and
the old houses of the city a last ray of gold which made the windows
sparkle like the reflection of a conflagration. Breathing that sea
breeze, so much more invigorating and balsamic as the land is
approached, contemplating all the power of those preparations she was
commissioned to destroy, all the power of that army which she was to
combat alone--she, a woman with a few bags of gold--Milady compared
herself mentally to Judith, the terrible Jewess, when she penetrated the
camp of the Assyrians and beheld the enormous mass of chariots, horses,
men, and arms, which a gesture of her hand was to dissipate like a cloud
of smoke.

They entered the roadstead; but as they drew near in order to cast
anchor, a little cutter, looking like a coastguard formidably armed,
approached the merchant vessel and dropped into the sea a boat which
directed its course to the ladder. This boat contained an officer, a
mate, and eight rowers. The officer alone went on board, where he was
received with all the deference inspired by the uniform.

The officer conversed a few instants with the captain, gave him several
papers, of which he was the bearer, to read, and upon the order of the
merchant captain the whole crew of the vessel, both passengers and
sailors, were called upon deck.

When this species of summons was made the officer inquired aloud the
point of the brig’s departure, its route, its landings; and to all these
questions the captain replied without difficulty and without hesitation.
Then the officer began to pass in review all the people, one after the
other, and stopping when he came to Milady, surveyed her very closely,
but without addressing a single word to her.

He then returned to the captain, said a few words to him, and as if from
that moment the vessel was under his command, he ordered a maneuver
which the crew executed immediately. Then the vessel resumed its course,
still escorted by the little cutter, which sailed side by side with it,
menacing it with the mouths of its six cannon. The boat followed in the
wake of the ship, a speck near the enormous mass.

During the examination of Milady by the officer, as may well be
imagined, Milady on her part was not less scrutinizing in her glances.
But however great was the power of this woman with eyes of flame in
reading the hearts of those whose secrets she wished to divine, she met
this time with a countenance of such impassivity that no discovery
followed her investigation. The officer who had stopped in front of her
and studied her with so much care might have been twenty-five or
twenty-six years of age. He was of pale complexion, with clear blue
eyes, rather deeply set; his mouth, fine and well cut, remained
motionless in its correct lines; his chin, strongly marked, denoted that
strength of will which in the ordinary Britannic type denotes mostly
nothing but obstinacy; a brow a little receding, as is proper for poets,
enthusiasts, and soldiers, was scarcely shaded by short thin hair which,
like the beard which covered the lower part of his face, was of a
beautiful deep chestnut color.

When they entered the port, it was already night. The fog increased the
darkness, and formed round the sternlights and lanterns of the jetty a
circle like that which surrounds the moon when the weather threatens to
become rainy. The air they breathed was heavy, damp, and cold.

Milady, that woman so courageous and firm, shivered in spite of herself.

The officer desired to have Milady’s packages pointed out to him, and
ordered them to be placed in the boat. When this operation was complete,
he invited her to descend by offering her his hand.

Milady looked at this man, and hesitated. “Who are you, sir,” asked she,
“who has the kindness to trouble yourself so particularly on my
account?”

“You may perceive, madame, by my uniform, that I am an officer in the
English navy,” replied the young man.

“But is it the custom for the officers in the English navy to place
themselves at the service of their female compatriots when they land in
a port of Great Britain, and carry their gallantry so far as to conduct
them ashore?”

“Yes, madame, it is the custom, not from gallantry but prudence, that in
time of war foreigners should be conducted to particular hotels, in
order that they may remain under the eye of the government until full
information can be obtained about them.”

These words were pronounced with the most exact politeness and the most
perfect calmness. Nevertheless, they had not the power of convincing
Milady.

“But I am not a foreigner, sir,” said she, with an accent as pure as
ever was heard between Portsmouth and Manchester; “my name is Lady
Clarik, and this measure--”

“This measure is general, madame; and you will seek in vain to evade
it.”

“I will follow you, then, sir.”

Accepting the hand of the officer, she began the descent of the ladder,
at the foot of which the boat waited. The officer followed her. A large
cloak was spread at the stern; the officer requested her to sit down
upon this cloak, and placed himself beside her.

“Row!” said he to the sailors.

The eight oars fell at once into the sea, making but a single sound,
giving but a single stroke, and the boat seemed to fly over the surface
of the water.

In five minutes they gained the land.
