was scarcely audible.

“And with whom?”

“With whom can it be, if not the Duke of--”

“The Duke of--”

“Yes, monsieur,” replied the citizen, giving a still fainter intonation
to his voice.

“But how do you know all this?”

“How do I know it?”

“Yes, how do you know it? No half-confidence, or--you understand!”

“I know it from my wife, monsieur--from my wife herself.”

“Who learns it from whom?”

“From Monsieur Laporte. Did I not tell you that she was the goddaughter
of Monsieur Laporte, the confidential man of the queen? Well, Monsieur
Laporte placed her near her Majesty in order that our poor queen might
at least have someone in whom she could place confidence, abandoned as
she is by the king, watched as she is by the cardinal, betrayed as she
is by everybody.”

“Ah, ah! It begins to develop itself,” said d’Artagnan.

“Now, my wife came home four days ago, monsieur. One of her conditions
was that she should come and see me twice a week; for, as I had the
honor to tell you, my wife loves me dearly--my wife, then, came and
confided to me that the queen at that very moment entertained great
fears.”

“Truly!”

“Yes. The cardinal, as it appears, pursues her and persecutes her more
than ever. He cannot pardon her the history of the Saraband. You know
the history of the Saraband?”

“PARDIEU! Know it!” replied d’Artagnan, who knew nothing about it, but
who wished to appear to know everything that was going on.

“So that now it is no longer hatred, but vengeance.”

“Indeed!”

“And the queen believes--”

“Well, what does the queen believe?”

“She believes that someone has written to the Duke of Buckingham in her
name.”

“In the queen’s name?”

“Yes, to make him come to Paris; and when once come to Paris, to draw
him into some snare.”

“The devil! But your wife, monsieur, what has she to do with all this?”

“Her devotion to the queen is known; and they wish either to remove her
from her mistress, or to intimidate her, in order to obtain her
Majesty’s secrets, or to seduce her and make use of her as a spy.”

“That is likely,” said d’Artagnan; “but the man who has abducted her--do
you know him?”

“I have told you that I believe I know him.”

“His name?”

“I do not know that; what I do know is that he is a creature of the
cardinal, his evil genius.”

“But you have seen him?”

“Yes, my wife pointed him out to me one day.”

“Has he anything remarkable about him by which one may recognize him?”

“Oh, certainly; he is a noble of very lofty carriage, black hair,
swarthy complexion, piercing eye, white teeth, and has a scar on his
temple.”

“A scar on his temple!” cried d’Artagnan; “and with that, white teeth, a
piercing eye, dark complexion, black hair, and haughty carriage--why,
that’s my man of Meung.”

“He is your man, do you say?”

“Yes, yes; but that has nothing to do with it. No, I am wrong. On the
contrary, that simplifies the matter greatly. If your man is mine, with
one blow I shall obtain two revenges, that’s all; but where to find this
man?”

“I know not.”

“Have you no information as to his abiding place?”

“None. One day, as I was conveying my wife back to the Louvre, he was
coming out as she was going in, and she showed him to me.”

“The devil! The devil!” murmured d’Artagnan; “all this is vague enough.
From whom have you learned of the abduction of your wife?”

“From Monsieur Laporte.”

“Did he give you any details?”

“He knew none himself.”

“And you have learned nothing from any other quarter?”

“Yes, I have received--”

“What?”

“I fear I am committing a great imprudence.”

“You always come back to that; but I must make you see this time that it
is too late to retreat.”

“I do not retreat, MORDIEU!” cried the citizen, swearing in order to
rouse his courage. “Besides, by the faith of Bonacieux--”

“You call yourself Bonacieux?” interrupted d’Artagnan.

“Yes, that is my name.”

“You said, then, by the word of Bonacieux. Pardon me for interrupting
you, but it appears to me that that name is familiar to me.”

“Possibly, monsieur. I am your landlord.”

“Ah, ah!” said d’Artagnan, half rising and bowing; “you are my
landlord?”

“Yes, monsieur, yes. And as it is three months since you have been here,
and though, distracted as you must be in your important occupations, you
have forgotten to pay me my rent--as, I say, I have not tormented you a
single instant, I thought you would appreciate my delicacy.”

“How can it be otherwise, my dear Bonacieux?” replied d’Artagnan; “trust
me, I am fully grateful for such unparalleled conduct, and if, as I told
you, I can be of any service to you--”

“I believe you, monsieur, I believe you; and as I was about to say, by
the word of Bonacieux, I have confidence in you.”

“Finish, then, what you were about to say.”

The citizen took a paper from his pocket, and presented it to
d’Artagnan.

“A letter?” said the young man.

“Which I received this morning.”

D’Artagnan opened it, and as the day was beginning to decline, he
approached the window to read it. The citizen followed him.

“‘Do not seek your wife,’” read d’Artagnan; “‘she will be restored to
you when there is no longer occasion for her. If you make a single step
to find her you are lost.’

“That’s pretty positive,” continued d’Artagnan; “but after all, it is
but a menace.”

“Yes; but that menace terrifies me. I am not a fighting man at all,
monsieur, and I am afraid of the Bastille.”

“Hum!” said d’Artagnan. “I have no greater regard for the Bastille than
you. If it were nothing but a sword thrust, why then--”

“I have counted upon you on this occasion, monsieur.”

“Yes?”

“Seeing you constantly surrounded by Musketeers of a very superb
appearance, and knowing that these Musketeers belong to Monsieur de
Treville, and were consequently enemies of the cardinal, I thought that
you and your friends, while rendering justice to your poor queen, would
be pleased to play his Eminence an ill turn.”

“Without doubt.”

“And then I have thought that considering three months’ lodging, about
which I have said nothing--”

“Yes, yes; you have already given me that reason, and I find it
excellent.”

“Reckoning still further, that as long as you do me the honor to remain
in my house I shall never speak to you about rent--”

“Very kind!”

“And adding to this, if there be need of it, meaning to offer you fifty
pistoles, if, against all probability, you should be short at the
present moment.”

“Admirable! You are rich then, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux?”

“I am comfortably off, monsieur, that’s all; I have scraped together
some such things as an income of two or three thousand crowns in the
haberdashery business, but more particularly in venturing some funds in
the last voyage of the celebrated navigator Jean Moquet; so that you
understand, monsieur--But!--” cried the citizen.

“What!” demanded d’Artagnan.

“Whom do I see yonder?”

“Where?”

“In the street, facing your window, in the embrasure of that door--a man
wrapped in a cloak.”

“It is he!” cried d’Artagnan and the citizen at the same time, each
having recognized his man.

“Ah, this time,” cried d’Artagnan, springing to his sword, “this time he
will not escape me!”

Drawing his sword from its scabbard, he rushed out of the apartment. On
the staircase he met Athos and Porthos, who were coming to see him. They
separated, and d’Artagnan rushed between them like a dart.

“Pah! Where are you going?” cried the two Musketeers in a breath.

“The man of Meung!” replied d’Artagnan, and disappeared.

D’Artagnan had more than once related to his friends his adventure with
the stranger, as well as the apparition of the beautiful foreigner, to
whom this man had confided some important missive.

The opinion of Athos was that d’Artagnan had lost his letter in the
skirmish. A gentleman, in his opinion--and according to d’Artagnan’s
portrait of him, the stranger must be a gentleman--would be incapable of
the baseness of stealing a letter.

Porthos saw nothing in all this but a love meeting, given by a lady to a
cavalier, or by a cavalier to a lady, which had been disturbed by the
presence of d’Artagnan and his yellow horse.

Aramis said that as these sorts of affairs were mysterious, it was
better not to fathom them.

They understood, then, from the few words which escaped from d’Artagnan,
what affair was in hand, and as they thought that overtaking his man, or
losing sight of him, d’Artagnan would return to his rooms, they kept on
their way.

When they entered d’Artagnan’s chamber, it was empty; the landlord,
dreading the consequences of the encounter which was doubtless about to
take place between the young man and the stranger, had, consistent with
the character he had given himself, judged it prudent to decamp.




9 D’ARTAGNAN SHOWS HIMSELF


As Athos and Porthos had foreseen, at the expiration of a half hour,
d’Artagnan returned. He had again missed his man, who had disappeared as
if by enchantment. D’Artagnan had run, sword in hand, through all the
neighboring streets, but had found nobody resembling the man he sought
for. Then he came back to the point where, perhaps, he ought to have
begun, and that was to knock at the door against which the stranger had
leaned; but this proved useless--for though he knocked ten or twelve
times in succession, no one answered, and some of the neighbors, who put
their noses out of their windows or were brought to their doors by the
noise, had assured him that that house, all the openings of which were
tightly closed, had not been inhabited for six months.

While d’Artagnan was running through the streets and knocking at doors,
Aramis had joined his companions; so that on returning home d’Artagnan
found the reunion complete.

“Well!” cried the three Musketeers all together, on seeing d’Artagnan
enter with his brow covered with perspiration and his countenance upset
with anger.

“Well!” cried he, throwing his sword upon the bed, “this man must be the
devil in person; he has disappeared like a phantom, like a shade, like a
specter.”

“Do you believe in apparitions?” asked Athos of Porthos.

“I never believe in anything I have not seen, and as I never have seen
apparitions, I don’t believe in them.”

“The Bible,” said Aramis, “makes our belief in them a law; the ghost of
Samuel appeared to Saul, and it is an article of faith that I should be
very sorry to see any doubt thrown upon, Porthos.”

“At all events, man or devil, body or shadow, illusion or reality, this
man is born for my damnation; for his flight has caused us to miss a
glorious affair, gentlemen--an affair by which there were a hundred
pistoles, and perhaps more, to be gained.”

“How is that?” cried Porthos and Aramis in a breath.

As to Athos, faithful to his system of reticence, he contented himself
with interrogating d’Artagnan by a look.

“Planchet,” said d’Artagnan to his domestic, who just then insinuated
his head through the half-open door in order to catch some fragments of
the conversation, “go down to my landlord, Monsieur Bonacieux, and ask
him to send me half a dozen bottles of Beaugency wine; I prefer that.”

“Ah, ah! You have credit with your landlord, then?” asked Porthos.

“Yes,” replied d’Artagnan, “from this very day; and mind, if the wine is
bad, we will send him to find better.”

“We must use, and not abuse,” said Aramis, sententiously.

“I always said that d’Artagnan had the longest head of the four,” said
Athos, who, having uttered his opinion, to which d’Artagnan replied with
a bow, immediately resumed his accustomed silence.

“But come, what is this about?” asked Porthos.

“Yes,” said Aramis, “impart it to us, my dear friend, unless the honor
of any lady be hazarded by this confidence; in that case you would do
better to keep it to yourself.”

“Be satisfied,” replied d’Artagnan; “the honor of no one will have cause
to complain of what I have to tell.”

He then related to his friends, word for word, all that had passed
between him and his host, and how the man who had abducted the wife of
his worthy landlord was the same with whom he had had the difference at
the hostelry of the Jolly Miller.

“Your affair is not bad,” said Athos, after having tasted like a
connoisseur and indicated by a nod of his head that he thought the wine
good; “and one may draw fifty or sixty pistoles from this good man. Then
there only remains to ascertain whether these fifty or sixty pistoles
are worth the risk of four heads.”

“But observe,” cried d’Artagnan, “that there is a woman in the affair--a
woman carried off, a woman who is doubtless threatened, tortured
perhaps, and all because she is faithful to her mistress.”

“Beware, d’Artagnan, beware,” said Aramis. “You grow a little too warm,
in my opinion, about the fate of Madame Bonacieux. Woman was created for
our destruction, and it is from her we inherit all our miseries.”

At this speech of Aramis, the brow of Athos became clouded and he bit
his lips.

“It is not Madame Bonacieux about whom I am anxious,” cried d’Artagnan,
“but the queen, whom the king abandons, whom the cardinal persecutes,
and who sees the heads of all her friends fall, one after the other.”

“Why does she love what we hate most in the world, the Spaniards and the
English?”

“Spain is her country,” replied d’Artagnan; “and it is very natural that
she should love the Spanish, who are the children of the same soil as
herself. As to the second reproach, I have heard it said that she does
not love the English, but an Englishman.”

“Well, and by my faith,” said Athos, “it must be acknowledged that this
Englishman is worthy of being loved. I never saw a man with a nobler air
than his.”

“Without reckoning that he dresses as nobody else can,” said Porthos. “I
was at the Louvre on the day when he scattered his pearls; and, PARDIEU,
I picked up two that I sold for ten pistoles each. Do you know him,
Aramis?”

“As well as you do, gentlemen; for I was among those who seized him in
the garden at Amiens, into which Monsieur Putange, the queen’s equerry,
introduced me. I was at school at the time, and the adventure appeared
to me to be cruel for the king.”

“Which would not prevent me,” said d’Artagnan, “if I knew where the Duke
of Buckingham was, from taking him by the hand and conducting him to the
queen, were it only to enrage the cardinal, and if we could find means
to play him a sharp turn, I vow that I would voluntarily risk my head in
doing it.”

“And did the mercer*,” rejoined Athos, “tell you, d’Artagnan, that the
queen thought that Buckingham had been brought over by a forged letter?”

    _*Haberdasher_

“She is afraid so.”

“Wait a minute, then,” said Aramis.

“What for?” demanded Porthos.

“Go on, while I endeavor to recall circumstances.”

“And now I am convinced,” said d’Artagnan, “that this abduction of the
queen’s woman is connected with the events of which we are speaking, and
perhaps with the presence of Buckingham in Paris.”

“The Gascon is full of ideas,” said Porthos, with admiration.

“I like to hear him talk,” said Athos; “his dialect amuses me.”

“Gentlemen,” cried Aramis, “listen to this.”

“Listen to Aramis,” said his three friends.

“Yesterday I was at the house of a doctor of theology, whom I sometimes
consult about my studies.”

Athos smiled.

“He resides in a quiet quarter,” continued Aramis; “his tastes and his
profession require it. Now, at the moment when I left his house--”

Here Aramis paused.

“Well,” cried his auditors; “at the moment you left his house?”

Aramis appeared to make a strong inward effort, like a man who, in the
full relation of a falsehood, finds himself stopped by some unforeseen
obstacle; but the eyes of his three companions were fixed upon him,
their ears were wide open, and there were no means of retreat.

“This doctor has a niece,” continued Aramis.

“Ah, he has a niece!” interrupted Porthos.

“A very respectable lady,” said Aramis.

The three friends burst into laughter.

“Ah, if you laugh, if you doubt me,” replied Aramis, “you shall know
nothing.”

“We believe like Mohammedans, and are as mute as tombstones,” said
Athos.

“I will continue, then,” resumed Aramis. “This niece comes sometimes to
see her uncle; and by chance was there yesterday at the same time that I
was, and it was my duty to offer to conduct her to her carriage.”

“Ah! She has a carriage, then, this niece of the doctor?” interrupted
Porthos, one of whose faults was a great looseness of tongue. “A nice
acquaintance, my friend!”

“Porthos,” replied Aramis, “I have had the occasion to observe to you
more than once that you are very indiscreet; and that is injurious to
you among the women.”

“Gentlemen, gentlemen,” cried d’Artagnan, who began to get a glimpse of
the result of the adventure, “the thing is serious. Let us try not to
jest, if we can. Go on Aramis, go on.”

“All at once, a tall, dark gentleman--just like yours, d’Artagnan.”

“The same, perhaps,” said he.

“Possibly,” continued Aramis, “came toward me, accompanied by five or
six men who followed about ten paces behind him; and in the politest
tone, ‘Monsieur Duke,’ said he to me, ‘and you madame,’ continued he,
addressing the lady on my arm--”

“The doctor’s niece?”

“Hold your tongue, Porthos,” said Athos; “you are insupportable.”

“‘--will you enter this carriage, and that without offering the least
resistance, without making the least noise?’”

“He took you for Buckingham!” cried d’Artagnan.

“I believe so,” replied Aramis.

“But the lady?” asked Porthos.

“He took her for the queen!” said d’Artagnan.

“Just so,” replied Aramis.

“The Gascon is the devil!” cried Athos; “nothing escapes him.”

“The fact is,” said Porthos, “Aramis is of the same height, and
something of the shape of the duke; but it nevertheless appears to me
that the dress of a Musketeer--”

“I wore an enormous cloak,” said Aramis.

“In the month of July? The devil!” said Porthos. “Is the doctor afraid
that you may be recognized?”

“I can comprehend that the spy may have been deceived by the person; but
the face--”

“I had a large hat,” said Aramis.

“Oh, good lord,” cried Porthos, “what precautions for the study of
theology!”

“Gentlemen, gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, “do not let us lose our time in
jesting. Let us separate, and let us seek the mercer’s wife--that is the
key of the intrigue.”

“A woman of such inferior condition! Can you believe so?” said Porthos,
protruding his lips with contempt.

“She is goddaughter to Laporte, the confidential valet of the queen.
Have I not told you so, gentlemen? Besides, it has perhaps been her
Majesty’s calculation to seek on this occasion for support so lowly.
High heads expose themselves from afar, and the cardinal is
longsighted.”

“Well,” said Porthos, “in the first place make a bargain with the
mercer, and a good bargain.”

“That’s useless,” said d’Artagnan; “for I believe if he does not pay us,
we shall be well enough paid by another party.”

At this moment a sudden noise of footsteps was heard upon the stairs;
the door was thrown violently open, and the unfortunate mercer rushed
into the chamber in which the council was held.

“Save me, gentlemen, for the love of heaven, save me!” cried he. “There
are four men come to arrest me. Save me! Save me!”

Porthos and Aramis arose.

“A moment,” cried d’Artagnan, making them a sign to replace in the
scabbard their half-drawn swords. “It is not courage that is needed; it
is prudence.”

“And yet,” cried Porthos, “we will not leave--”

“You will leave d’Artagnan to act as he thinks proper,” said Athos. “He
has, I repeat, the longest head of the four, and for my part I declare
that I will obey him. Do as you think best, d’Artagnan.”

At this moment the four Guards appeared at the door of the antechamber,
but seeing four Musketeers standing, and their swords by their sides,
they hesitated about going farther.

“Come in, gentlemen, come in,” called d’Artagnan; “you are here in my
apartment, and we are all faithful servants of the king and cardinal.”

“Then, gentlemen, you will not oppose our executing the orders we have
received?” asked one who appeared to be the leader of the party.

“On the contrary, gentlemen, we would assist you if it were necessary.”

“What does he say?” grumbled Porthos.

“You are a simpleton,” said Athos. “Silence!”

“But you promised me--” whispered the poor mercer.

“We can only save you by being free ourselves,” replied d’Artagnan, in a
rapid, low tone; “and if we appear inclined to defend you, they will
arrest us with you.”

“It seems, nevertheless--”

“Come, gentlemen, come!” said d’Artagnan, aloud; “I have no motive for
defending Monsieur. I saw him today for the first time, and he can tell
you on what occasion; he came to demand the rent of my lodging. Is that
not true, Monsieur Bonacieux? Answer!”

“That is the very truth,” cried the mercer; “but Monsieur does not tell
you--”

“Silence, with respect to me, silence, with respect to my friends;
silence about the queen, above all, or you will ruin everybody without
saving yourself! Come, come, gentlemen, remove the fellow.” And
d’Artagnan pushed the half-stupefied mercer among the Guards, saying to
him, “You are a shabby old fellow, my dear. You come to demand money of
me--of a Musketeer! To prison with him! Gentlemen, once more, take him
to prison, and keep him under key as long as possible; that will give me
time to pay him.”

The officers were full of thanks, and took away their prey. As they were
going down d’Artagnan laid his hand on the shoulder of their leader.

“May I not drink to your health, and you to mine?” said d’Artagnan,
filling two glasses with the Beaugency wine which he had obtained from
the liberality of M. Bonacieux.

“That will do me great honor,” said the leader of the posse, “and I
accept thankfully.”

“Then to yours, monsieur--what is your name?”

“Boisrenard.”

“Monsieur Boisrenard.”

“To yours, my gentlemen! What is your name, in your turn, if you
please?”

“d’Artagnan.”

“To yours, monsieur.”

“And above all others,” cried d’Artagnan, as if carried away by his
enthusiasm, “to that of the king and the cardinal.”

The leader of the posse would perhaps have doubted the sincerity of
d’Artagnan if the wine had been bad; but the wine was good, and he was
convinced.

“What diabolical villainy you have performed here,” said Porthos, when
the officer had rejoined his companions and the four friends found
themselves alone. “Shame, shame, for four Musketeers to allow an
unfortunate fellow who cried for help to be arrested in their midst! And
a gentleman to hobnob with a bailiff!”

“Porthos,” said Aramis, “Athos has already told you that you are a
simpleton, and I am quite of his opinion. D’Artagnan, you are a great
man; and when you occupy Monsieur de Treville’s place, I will come and
ask your influence to secure me an abbey.”

“Well, I am in a maze,” said Porthos; “do YOU approve of what d’Artagnan
has done?”

“PARBLEU! Indeed I do,” said Athos; “I not only approve of what he has
done, but I congratulate him upon it.”

“And now, gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, without stopping to explain his
conduct to Porthos, “All for one, one for all--that is our motto, is it
not?”

“And yet--” said Porthos.

“Hold out your hand and swear!” cried Athos and Aramis at once.

Overcome by example, grumbling to himself, nevertheless, Porthos
stretched out his hand, and the four friends repeated with one voice the
formula dictated by d’Artagnan:

“All for one, one for all.”

“That’s well! Now let us everyone retire to his own home,” said
d’Artagnan, as if he had done nothing but command all his life; “and
attention! For from this moment we are at feud with the cardinal.”




10 A MOUSETRAP IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY


The invention of the mousetrap does not date from our days; as soon as
societies, in forming, had invented any kind of police, that police
invented mousetraps.

As perhaps our readers are not familiar with the slang of the Rue de
Jerusalem, and as it is fifteen years since we applied this word for the
first time to this thing, allow us to explain to them what is a
mousetrap.

When in a house, of whatever kind it may be, an individual suspected of
any crime is arrested, the arrest is held secret. Four or five men are
placed in ambuscade in the first room. The door is opened to all who
knock. It is closed after them, and they are arrested; so that at the
end of two or three days they have in their power almost all the
HABITUES of the establishment. And that is a mousetrap.

The apartment of M. Bonacieux, then, became a mousetrap; and whoever
appeared there was taken and interrogated by the cardinal’s people. It
must be observed that as a separate passage led to the first floor, in
which d’Artagnan lodged, those who called on him were exempted from this
detention.

Besides, nobody came thither but the three Musketeers; they had all been
engaged in earnest search and inquiries, but had discovered nothing.
Athos had even gone so far as to question M. de Treville--a thing which,
considering the habitual reticence of the worthy Musketeer, had very
much astonished his captain. But M. de Treville knew nothing, except
that the last time he had seen the cardinal, the king, and the queen,
the cardinal looked very thoughtful, the king uneasy, and the redness of
the queen’s eyes donated that she had been sleepless or tearful. But
this last circumstance was not striking, as the queen since her marriage
had slept badly and wept much.

M de Treville requested Athos, whatever might happen, to be observant of
his duty to the king, but particularly to the queen, begging him to
convey his desires to his comrades.

As to d’Artagnan, he did not budge from his apartment. He converted his
chamber into an observatory. From his windows he saw all the visitors
who were caught. Then, having removed a plank from his floor, and
nothing remaining but a simple ceiling between him and the room beneath,
in which the interrogatories were made, he heard all that passed between
the inquisitors and the accused.

The interrogatories, preceded by a minute search operated upon the
persons arrested, were almost always framed thus: “Has Madame Bonacieux
sent anything to you for her husband, or any other person? Has Monsieur
Bonacieux sent anything to you for his wife, or for any other person?
Has either of them confided anything to you by word of mouth?”

“If they knew anything, they would not question people in this manner,”
said d’Artagnan to himself. “Now, what is it they want to know? Why,
they want to know if the Duke of Buckingham is in Paris, and if he has
had, or is likely to have, an interview with the queen.”

D’Artagnan held onto this idea, which, from what he had heard, was not
wanting in probability.

In the meantime, the mousetrap continued in operation, and likewise
d’Artagnan’s vigilance.

On the evening of the day after the arrest of poor Bonacieux, as Athos
had just left d’Artagnan to report at M. de Treville’s, as nine o’clock
had just struck, and as Planchet, who had not yet made the bed, was
beginning his task, a knocking was heard at the street door. The door
was instantly opened and shut; someone was taken in the mousetrap.

D’Artagnan flew to his hole, laid himself down on the floor at full
length, and listened.

Cries were soon heard, and then moans, which someone appeared to be
endeavoring to stifle. There were no questions.

“The devil!” said d’Artagnan to himself. “It seems like a woman! They
search her; she resists; they use force--the scoundrels!”

In spite of his prudence, d’Artagnan restrained himself with great
difficulty from taking a part in the scene that was going on below.

“But I tell you that I am the mistress of the house, gentlemen! I tell
you I am Madame Bonacieux; I tell you I belong to the queen!” cried the
unfortunate woman.

“Madame Bonacieux!” murmured d’Artagnan. “Can I be so lucky as to find
what everybody is seeking for?”

The voice became more and more indistinct; a tumultuous movement shook
the partition. The victim resisted as much as a woman could resist four
men.

“Pardon, gentlemen--par--” murmured the voice, which could now only be
heard in inarticulate sounds.

“They are binding her; they are going to drag her away,” cried
d’Artagnan to himself, springing up from the floor. “My sword! Good, it
is by my side! Planchet!”

“Monsieur.”

“Run and seek Athos, Porthos and Aramis. One of the three will certainly
be at home, perhaps all three. Tell them to take arms, to come here, and
to run! Ah, I remember, Athos is at Monsieur de Treville’s.”

“But where are you going, monsieur, where are you going?”

“I am going down by the window, in order to be there the sooner,” cried
d’Artagnan. “You put back the boards, sweep the floor, go out at the
door, and run as I told you.”

“Oh, monsieur! Monsieur! You will kill yourself,” cried Planchet.

“Hold your tongue, stupid fellow,” said d’Artagnan; and laying hold of
the casement, he let himself gently down from the first story, which
fortunately was not very elevated, without doing himself the slightest
injury.

He then went straight to the door and knocked, murmuring, “I will go
myself and be caught in the mousetrap, but woe be to the cats that shall
pounce upon such a mouse!”

The knocker had scarcely sounded under the hand of the young man before
the tumult ceased, steps approached, the door was opened, and
d’Artagnan, sword in hand, rushed into the rooms of M. Bonacieux, the
door of which, doubtless acted upon by a spring, closed after him.

Then those who dwelt in Bonacieux’s unfortunate house, together with the
nearest neighbors, heard loud cries, stamping of feet, clashing of
swords, and breaking of furniture. A moment after, those who, surprised
by this tumult, had gone to their windows to learn the cause of it, saw
the door open, and four men, clothed in black, not COME out of it, but
FLY, like so many frightened crows, leaving on the ground and on the
corners of the furniture, feathers from their wings; that is to say,
patches of their clothes and fragments of their cloaks.

D’Artagnan was conqueror--without much effort, it must be confessed, for
only one of the officers was armed, and even he defended himself for
form’s sake. It is true that the three others had endeavored to knock
the young man down with chairs, stools, and crockery; but two or three
scratches made by the Gascon’s blade terrified them. Ten minutes
sufficed for their defeat, and d’Artagnan remained master of the field
of battle.

The neighbors who had opened their windows, with the coolness peculiar
to the inhabitants of Paris in these times of perpetual riots and
disturbances, closed them again as soon as they saw the four men in
black flee--their instinct telling them that for the time all was over.
Besides, it began to grow late, and then, as today, people went to bed
early in the quarter of the Luxembourg.

On being left alone with Mme. Bonacieux, d’Artagnan turned toward her;
the poor woman reclined where she had been left, half-fainting upon an
armchair. D’Artagnan examined her with a rapid glance.

She was a charming woman of twenty-five or twenty-six years, with dark
hair, blue eyes, and a nose slightly turned up, admirable teeth, and a
complexion marbled with rose and opal. There, however, ended the signs
which might have confounded her with a lady of rank. The hands were
white, but without delicacy; the feet did not bespeak the woman of
quality. Happily, d’Artagnan was not yet acquainted with such niceties.

While d’Artagnan was examining Mme. Bonacieux, and was, as we have said,
close to her, he saw on the ground a fine cambric handkerchief, which he
picked up, as was his habit, and at the corner of which he recognized
the same cipher he had seen on the handkerchief which had nearly caused
him and Aramis to cut each other’s throat.

From that time, d’Artagnan had been cautious with respect to
handkerchiefs with arms on them, and he therefore placed in the pocket
of Mme. Bonacieux the one he had just picked up.

At that moment Mme. Bonacieux recovered her senses. She opened her eyes,
looked around her with terror, saw that the apartment was empty and that
she was alone with her liberator. She extended her hands to him with a
smile. Mme. Bonacieux had the sweetest smile in the world.

“Ah, monsieur!” said she, “you have saved me; permit me to thank you.”

“Madame,” said d’Artagnan, “I have only done what every gentleman would
have done in my place; you owe me no thanks.”

“Oh, yes, monsieur, oh, yes; and I hope to prove to you that you have
not served an ingrate. But what could these men, whom I at first took
for robbers, want with me, and why is Monsieur Bonacieux not here?”

“Madame, those men were more dangerous than any robbers could have been,
for they are the agents of the cardinal; and as to your husband,
Monsieur Bonacieux, he is not here because he was yesterday evening
conducted to the Bastille.”

“My husband in the Bastille!” cried Mme. Bonacieux. “Oh, my God! What
has he done? Poor dear man, he is innocence itself!”

And something like a faint smile lighted the still-terrified features of
the young woman.

“What has he done, madame?” said d’Artagnan. “I believe that his only
crime is to have at the same time the good fortune and the misfortune to
be your husband.”

“But, monsieur, you know then--”

“I know that you have been abducted, madame.”

“And by whom? Do you know him? Oh, if you know him, tell me!”

“By a man of from forty to forty-five years, with black hair, a dark
complexion, and a scar on his left temple.”

“That is he, that is he; but his name?”

“Ah, his name? I do not know that.”

“And did my husband know I had been carried off?”

“He was informed of it by a letter, written to him by the abductor
himself.”

“And does he suspect,” said Mme. Bonacieux, with some embarrassment,
“the cause of this event?”

“He attributed it, I believe, to a political cause.”

“I doubted from the first; and now I think entirely as he does. Then my
dear Monsieur Bonacieux has not suspected me a single instant?”

“So far from it, madame, he was too proud of your prudence, and above
all, of your love.”

A second smile, almost imperceptible, stole over the rosy lips of the
pretty young woman.

“But,” continued d’Artagnan, “how did you escape?”

“I took advantage of a moment when they left me alone; and as I had
known since morning the reason of my abduction, with the help of the
sheets I let myself down from the window. Then, as I believed my husband
would be at home, I hastened hither.”

“To place yourself under his protection?”

“Oh, no, poor dear man! I knew very well that he was incapable of
defending me; but as he could serve us in other ways, I wished to inform
him.”

“Of what?”

“Oh, that is not my secret; I must not, therefore, tell you.”

“Besides,” said d’Artagnan, “pardon me, madame, if, guardsman as I am, I
remind you of prudence--besides, I believe we are not here in a very
proper place for imparting confidences. The men I have put to flight
will return reinforced; if they find us here, we are lost. I have sent
for three of my friends, but who knows whether they were at home?”

“Yes, yes! You are right,” cried the affrighted Mme. Bonacieux; “let us
fly! Let us save ourselves.”

At these words she passed her arm under that of d’Artagnan, and urged
him forward eagerly.

“But whither shall we fly--whither escape?”

“Let us first withdraw from this house; afterward we shall see.”

The young woman and the young man, without taking the trouble to shut
the door after them, descended the Rue des Fossoyeurs rapidly, turned
into the Rue des Fosses-Monsieur-le-Prince, and did not stop till they
came to the Place St. Sulpice.

“And now what are we to do, and where do you wish me to conduct you?”
asked d’Artagnan.

“I am at quite a loss how to answer you, I admit,” said Mme. Bonacieux.
“My intention was to inform Monsieur Laporte, through my husband, in
order that Monsieur Laporte might tell us precisely what had taken place
at the Louvre in the last three days, and whether there is any danger in
presenting myself there.”

“But I,” said d’Artagnan, “can go and inform Monsieur Laporte.”

“No doubt you could, only there is one misfortune, and that is that
Monsieur Bonacieux is known at the Louvre, and would be allowed to pass;
whereas you are not known there, and the gate would be closed against
you.”

“Ah, bah!” said d’Artagnan; “you have at some wicket of the Louvre a
CONCIERGE who is devoted to you, and who, thanks to a password, would--”

Mme. Bonacieux looked earnestly at the young man.

“And if I give you this password,” said she, “would you forget it as
soon as you used it?”

“By my honor, by the faith of a gentleman!” said d’Artagnan, with an
accent so truthful that no one could mistake it.

“Then I believe you. You appear to be a brave young man; besides, your
fortune may perhaps be the result of your devotedness.”

“I will do, without a promise and voluntarily, all that I can do to
serve the king and be agreeable to the queen. Dispose of me, then, as a
friend.”

“But I--where shall I go meanwhile?”

“Is there nobody from whose house Monsieur Laporte can come and fetch
you?”

“No, I can trust nobody.”

“Stop,” said d’Artagnan; “we are near Athos’s door. Yes, here it is.”

“Who is this Athos?”

“One of my friends.”

“But if he should be at home and see me?”

“He is not at home, and I will carry away the key, after having placed
you in his apartment.”

“But if he should return?”

“Oh, he won’t return; and if he should, he will be told that I have
brought a woman with me, and that woman is in his apartment.”

“But that will compromise me sadly, you know.”

“Of what consequence? Nobody knows you. Besides, we are in a situation
to overlook ceremony.”

“Come, then, let us go to your friend’s house. Where does he live?”

“Rue Ferou, two steps from here.”

“Let us go!”

Both resumed their way. As d’Artagnan had foreseen, Athos was not
within. He took the key, which was customarily given him as one of the
family, ascended the stairs, and introduced Mme. Bonacieux into the
little apartment of which we have given a description.

“You are at home,” said he. “Remain here, fasten the door inside, and
open it to nobody unless you hear three taps like this;” and he tapped
thrice--two taps close together and pretty hard, the other after an
interval, and lighter.

“That is well,” said Mme. Bonacieux. “Now, in my turn, let me give you
my instructions.”

“I am all attention.”

“Present yourself at the wicket of the Louvre, on the side of the Rue de
l’Echelle, and ask for Germain.”

“Well, and then?”

“He will ask you what you want, and you will answer by these two words,
‘Tours’ and ‘Bruxelles.’ He will at once put himself at your orders.”

“And what shall I command him?”

“To go and fetch Monsieur Laporte, the queen’s VALET DE CHAMBRE.”

“And when he shall have informed him, and Monsieur Laporte is come?”

“You will send him to me.”

“That is well; but where and how shall I see you again?”

“Do you wish to see me again?”

“Certainly.”

“Well, let that care be mine, and be at ease.”

“I depend upon your word.”

“You may.”

D’Artagnan bowed to Mme. Bonacieux, darting at her the most loving
glance that he could possibly concentrate upon her charming little
person; and while he descended the stairs, he heard the door closed and
double-locked. In two bounds he was at the Louvre; as he entered the
wicket of L’Echelle, ten o’clock struck. All the events we have
described had taken place within a half hour.

Everything fell out as Mme. Bonacieux prophesied. On hearing the
password, Germain bowed. In a few minutes, Laporte was at the lodge; in
two words d’Artagnan informed him where Mme. Bonacieux was. Laporte
assured himself, by having it twice repeated, of the accurate address,
and set off at a run. Hardly, however, had he taken ten steps before he
returned.

“Young man,” said he to d’Artagnan, “a suggestion.”

“What?”

“You may get into trouble by what has taken place.”

“You believe so?”

“Yes. Have you any friend whose clock is too slow?”

“Well?”

“Go and call upon him, in order that he may give evidence of your having
been with him at half past nine. In a court of justice that is called an
alibi.”

D’Artagnan found his advice prudent. He took to his heels, and was soon
at M. de Treville’s; but instead of going into the saloon with the rest
of the crowd, he asked to be introduced to M. de Treville’s office. As
d’Artagnan so constantly frequented the hotel, no difficulty was made in
complying with his request, and a servant went to inform M. de Treville
that his young compatriot, having something important to communicate,
solicited a private audience. Five minutes after, M. de Treville was
asking d’Artagnan what he could do to serve him, and what caused his
visit at so late an hour.

“Pardon me, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan, who had profited by the moment
he had been left alone to put back M. de Treville’s clock three-quarters
of an hour, “but I thought, as it was yet only twenty-five minutes past
nine, it was not too late to wait upon you.”

“Twenty-five minutes past nine!” cried M. de Treville, looking at the
clock; “why, that’s impossible!”

“Look, rather, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan, “the clock shows it.”

“That’s true,” said M. de Treville; “I believed it later. But what can I
do for you?”

Then d’Artagnan told M. de Treville a long history about the queen. He
expressed to him the fears he entertained with respect to her Majesty;
he related to him what he had heard of the projects of the cardinal with
regard to Buckingham, and all with a tranquillity and candor of which M.
de Treville was the more the dupe, from having himself, as we have said,
observed something fresh between the cardinal, the king, and the queen.

As ten o’clock was striking, d’Artagnan left M. de Treville, who thanked
him for his information, recommended him to have the service of the king
and queen always at heart, and returned to the saloon; but at the foot
of the stairs, d’Artagnan remembered he had forgotten his cane. He
consequently sprang up again, re-entered the office, with a turn of his
finger set the clock right again, that it might not be perceived the
next day that it had been put wrong, and certain from that time that he
had a witness to prove his alibi, he ran downstairs and soon found
himself in the street.




11 IN WHICH THE PLOT THICKENS


His visit to M. de Treville being paid, the pensive d’Artagnan took the
longest way homeward.

On what was d’Artagnan thinking, that he strayed thus from his path,
gazing at the stars of heaven, and sometimes sighing, sometimes smiling?

He was thinking of Mme. Bonacieux. For an apprentice Musketeer the young
woman was almost an ideal of love. Pretty, mysterious, initiated in
almost all the secrets of the court, which reflected such a charming
gravity over her pleasing features, it might be surmised that she was
not wholly unmoved; and this is an irresistible charm to novices in
love. Moreover, d’Artagnan had delivered her from the hands of the
demons who wished to search and ill treat her; and this important
service had established between them one of those sentiments of
gratitude which so easily assume a more tender character.

D’Artagnan already fancied himself, so rapid is the flight of our dreams
upon the wings of imagination, accosted by a messenger from the young
woman, who brought him some billet appointing a meeting, a gold chain,
or a diamond. We have observed that young cavaliers received presents
from their king without shame. Let us add that in these times of lax
morality they had no more delicacy with respect to the mistresses; and
that the latter almost always left them valuable and durable
remembrances, as if they essayed to conquer the fragility of their
sentiments by the solidity of their gifts.

Without a blush, men made their way in the world by the means of women
blushing. Such as were only beautiful gave their beauty, whence, without
doubt, comes the proverb, “The most beautiful girl in the world can only
give what she has.” Such as were rich gave in addition a part of their
money; and a vast number of heroes of that gallant period may be cited
who would neither have won their spurs in the first place, nor their
battles afterward, without the purse, more or less furnished, which
their mistress fastened to the saddle bow.

D’Artagnan owned nothing. Provincial diffidence, that slight varnish,
the ephemeral flower, that down of the peach, had evaporated to the
winds through the little orthodox counsels which the three Musketeers
gave their friend. D’Artagnan, following the strange custom of the
times, considered himself at Paris as on a campaign, neither more nor
less than if he had been in Flanders--Spain yonder, woman here. In each
there was an enemy to contend with, and contributions to be levied.

But, we must say, at the present moment d’Artagnan was ruled by a
feeling much more noble and disinterested. The mercer had said that he
was rich; the young man might easily guess that with so weak a man as M.
Bonacieux; and interest was almost foreign to this commencement of love,
which had been the consequence of it. We say ALMOST, for the idea that a
young, handsome, kind, and witty woman is at the same time rich takes
nothing from the beginning of love, but on the contrary strengthens it.

There are in affluence a crowd of aristocratic cares and caprices which
are highly becoming to beauty. A fine and white stocking, a silken robe,
a lace kerchief, a pretty slipper on the foot, a tasty ribbon on the
head do not make an ugly woman pretty, but they make a pretty woman
beautiful, without reckoning the hands, which gain by all this; the
hands, among women particularly, to be beautiful must be idle.

Then d’Artagnan, as the reader, from whom we have not concealed the
state of his fortune, very well knows--d’Artagnan was not a millionaire;
he hoped to become one someday, but the time which in his own mind he
fixed upon for this happy change was still far distant. In the
meanwhile, how disheartening to see the woman one loves long for those
thousands of nothings which constitute a woman’s happiness, and be
unable to give her those thousands of nothings. At least, when the woman
is rich and the lover is not, that which he cannot offer she offers to
herself; and although it is generally with her husband’s money that she
procures herself this indulgence, the gratitude for it seldom reverts to
him.

Then d’Artagnan, disposed to become the most tender of lovers, was at
the same time a very devoted friend. In the midst of his amorous
projects for the mercer’s wife, he did not forget his friends. The
pretty Mme. Bonacieux was just the woman to walk with in the Plain St.
Denis or in the fair of St. Germain, in company with Athos, Porthos, and
Aramis, to whom d’Artagnan had often remarked this. Then one could enjoy
charming little dinners, where one touches on one side the hand of a
friend, and on the other the foot of a mistress. Besides, on pressing
occasions, in extreme difficulties, d’Artagnan would become the
preserver of his friends.

And M. Bonacieux, whom d’Artagnan had pushed into the hands of the
officers, denying him aloud although he had promised in a whisper to
save him? We are compelled to admit to our readers that d’Artagnan
thought nothing about him in any way; or that if he did think of him, it
was only to say to himself that he was very well where he was, wherever
it might be. Love is the most selfish of all the passions.

Let our readers reassure themselves. If d’Artagnan forgets his host, or
appears to forget him, under the pretense of not knowing where he has
been carried, we will not forget him, and we know where he is. But for
the moment, let us do as did the amorous Gascon; we will see after the
worthy mercer later.

D’Artagnan, reflecting on his future amours, addressing himself to the
beautiful night, and smiling at the stars, ascended the Rue
Cherish-Midi, or Chase-Midi, as it was then called. As he found himself
in the quarter in which Aramis lived, he took it into his head to pay
his friend a visit in order to explain the motives which had led him to
send Planchet with a request that he would come instantly to the
mousetrap. Now, if Aramis had been at home when Planchet came to his
abode, he had doubtless hastened to the Rue des Fossoyeurs, and finding
nobody there but his other two companions perhaps, they would not be
able to conceive what all this meant. This mystery required an
explanation; at least, so d’Artagnan declared to himself.

He likewise thought this was an opportunity for talking about pretty
little Mme. Bonacieux, of whom his head, if not his heart, was already
full. We must never look for discretion in first love. First love is
accompanied by such excessive joy that unless the joy be allowed to
overflow, it will stifle you.

Paris for two hours past had been dark, and seemed a desert. Eleven
o’clock sounded from all the clocks of the Faubourg St. Germain. It was
delightful weather. D’Artagnan was passing along a lane on the spot
where the Rue d’Assas is now situated, breathing the balmy emanations
which were borne upon the wind from the Rue de Vaugirard, and which
arose from the gardens refreshed by the dews of evening and the breeze
of night. From a distance resounded, deadened, however, by good
shutters, the songs of the tipplers, enjoying themselves in the cabarets
scattered along the plain. Arrived at the end of the lane, d’Artagnan
turned to the left. The house in which Aramis dwelt was situated between
the Rue Cassette and the Rue Servandoni.

D’Artagnan had just passed the Rue Cassette, and already perceived the
door of his friend’s house, shaded by a mass of sycamores and clematis
which formed a vast arch opposite the front of it, when he perceived
something like a shadow issuing from the Rue Servandoni. This something
was enveloped in a cloak, and d’Artagnan at first believed it was a man;
but by the smallness of the form, the hesitation of the walk, and the
indecision of the step, he soon discovered that it was a woman. Further,
this woman, as if not certain of the house she was seeking, lifted up
her eyes to look around her, stopped, went backward, and then returned
again. D’Artagnan was perplexed.

“Shall I go and offer her my services?” thought he. “By her step she
must be young; perhaps she is pretty. Oh, yes! But a woman who wanders
in the streets at this hour only ventures out to meet her lover. If I
should disturb a rendezvous, that would not be the best means of
commencing an acquaintance.”

Meantime the young woman continued to advance, counting the houses and
windows. This was neither long nor difficult. There were but three
hotels in this part of the street; and only two windows looking toward
the road, one of which was in a pavilion parallel to that which Aramis
occupied, the other belonging to Aramis himself.

“PARIDIEU!” said d’Artagnan to himself, to whose mind the niece of the
theologian reverted, “PARDIEU, it would be droll if this belated dove
should be in search of our friend’s house. But on my soul, it looks so.
Ah, my dear Aramis, this time I shall find you out.” And d’Artagnan,
making himself as small as he could, concealed himself in the darkest
side of the street near a stone bench placed at the back of a niche.

The young woman continued to advance; and in addition to the lightness
of her step, which had betrayed her, she emitted a little cough which
denoted a sweet voice. D’Artagnan believed this cough to be a signal.

Nevertheless, whether the cough had been answered by a similar signal
which had fixed the irresolution of the nocturnal seeker, or whether
without this aid she saw that she had arrived at the end of her journey,
she resolutely drew near to Aramis’s shutter, and tapped, at three equal
intervals, with her bent finger.

“This is all very fine, dear Aramis,” murmured d’Artagnan. “Ah, Monsieur
Hypocrite, I understand how you study theology.”

The three blows were scarcely struck, when the inside blind was opened
and a light appeared through the panes of the outside shutter.

“Ah, ah!” said the listener, “not through doors, but through windows!
Ah, this visit was expected. We shall see the windows open, and the lady
enter by escalade. Very pretty!”

But to the great astonishment of d’Artagnan, the shutter remained
closed. Still more, the light which had shone for an instant
disappeared, and all was again in obscurity.

D’Artagnan thought this could not last long, and continued to look with
all his eyes and listen with all his ears.

He was right; at the end of some seconds two sharp taps were heard
inside. The young woman in the street replied by a single tap, and the
shutter was opened a little way.

It may be judged whether d’Artagnan looked or listened with avidity.
Unfortunately the light had been removed into another chamber; but the
eyes of the young man were accustomed to the night. Besides, the eyes of
the Gascons have, as it is asserted, like those of cats, the faculty of
seeing in the dark.

D’Artagnan then saw that the young woman took from her pocket a white
object, which she unfolded quickly, and which took the form of a
handkerchief. She made her interlocutor observe the corner of this
unfolded object.

This immediately recalled to d’Artagnan’s mind the handkerchief which he
had found at the feet of Mme. Bonacieux, which had reminded him of that
which he had dragged from under the feet of Aramis.

“What the devil could that handkerchief signify?”

Placed where he was, d’Artagnan could not perceive the face of Aramis.
We say Aramis, because the young man entertained no doubt that it was
his friend who held this dialogue from the interior with the lady of the
exterior. Curiosity prevailed over prudence; and profiting by the
preoccupation into which the sight of the handkerchief appeared to have
plunged the two personages now on the scene, he stole from his hiding
place, and quick as lightning, but stepping with utmost caution, he ran
and placed himself close to the angle of the wall, from which his eye
could pierce the interior of Aramis’s room.

Upon gaining this advantage d’Artagnan was near uttering a cry of
surprise; it was not Aramis who was conversing with the nocturnal
visitor, it was a woman! D’Artagnan, however, could only see enough to
recognize the form of her vestments, not enough to distinguish her
features.

At the same instant the woman inside drew a second handkerchief from her
pocket, and exchanged it for that which had just been shown to her. Then
some words were spoken by the two women. At length the shutter closed.
The woman who was outside the window turned round, and passed within
four steps of d’Artagnan, pulling down the hood of her mantle; but the
precaution was too late, d’Artagnan had already recognized Mme.
Bonacieux.

Mme. Bonacieux! The suspicion that it was she had crossed the mind of
d’Artagnan when she drew the handkerchief from her pocket; but what
probability was there that Mme. Bonacieux, who had sent for M. Laporte
in order to be reconducted to the Louvre, should be running about the
streets of Paris at half past eleven at night, at the risk of being
abducted a second time?

This must be, then, an affair of importance; and what is the most
important affair to a woman of twenty-five! Love.

But was it on her own account, or on account of another, that she
exposed herself to such hazards? This was a question the young man asked
himself, whom the demon of jealousy already gnawed, being in heart
neither more nor less than an accepted lover.

There was a very simple means of satisfying himself whither Mme.
Bonacieux was going; that was to follow her. This method was so simple
that d’Artagnan employed it quite naturally and instinctively.

But at the sight of the young man, who detached himself from the wall
like a statue walking from its niche, and at the noise of the steps
which she heard resound behind her, Mme. Bonacieux uttered a little cry
and fled.

D’Artagnan ran after her. It was not difficult for him to overtake a
woman embarrassed with her cloak. He came up with her before she had
traversed a third of the street. The unfortunate woman was exhausted,
not by fatigue, but by terror, and when d’Artagnan placed his hand upon
her shoulder, she sank upon one knee, crying in a choking voice, “Kill
me, if you please, you shall know nothing!”

D’Artagnan raised her by passing his arm round her waist; but as he felt
by her weight she was on the point of fainting, he made haste to
reassure her by protestations of devotedness. These protestations were
nothing for Mme. Bonacieux, for such protestations may be made with the
worst intentions in the world; but the voice was all. Mme. Bonacieux
thought she recognized the sound of that voice; she reopened her eyes,
cast a quick glance upon the man who had terrified her so, and at once
perceiving it was d’Artagnan, she uttered a cry of joy, “Oh, it is you,
it is you! Thank God, thank God!”

“Yes, it is I,” said d’Artagnan, “it is I, whom God has sent to watch
over you.”

“Was it with that intention you followed me?” asked the young woman,
with a coquettish smile, whose somewhat bantering character resumed its
influence, and with whom all fear had disappeared from the moment in
which she recognized a friend in one she had taken for an enemy.

“No,” said d’Artagnan; “no, I confess it. It was chance that threw me in
your way; I saw a woman knocking at the window of one of my friends.”

“One of your friends?” interrupted Mme. Bonacieux.

“Without doubt; Aramis is one of my best friends.”

“Aramis! Who is he?”

“Come, come, you won’t tell me you don’t know Aramis?”

“This is the first time I ever heard his name pronounced.”

“It is the first time, then, that you ever went to that house?”

“Undoubtedly.”

“And you did not know that it was inhabited by a young man?”

“No.”

“By a Musketeer?”

“No, indeed!”

“It was not he, then, you came to seek?”

“Not the least in the world. Besides, you must have seen that the person
to whom I spoke was a woman.”

“That is true; but this woman is a friend of Aramis--”

“I know nothing of that.”

“--since she lodges with him.”

“That does not concern me.”

“But who is she?”

“Oh, that is not my secret.”

“My dear Madame Bonacieux, you are charming; but at the same time you
are one of the most mysterious women.”

“Do I lose by that?”

“No; you are, on the contrary, adorable.”

“Give me your arm, then.”

“Most willingly. And now?”

“Now escort me.”

“Where?”

“Where I am going.”

“But where are you going?”

“You will see, because you will leave me at the door.”

“Shall I wait for you?”

“That will be useless.”

“You will return alone, then?”

“Perhaps yes, perhaps no.”

“But will the person who shall accompany you afterward be a man or a
woman?”

“I don’t know yet.”

“But I will know it!”

“How so?”

“I will wait until you come out.”

“In that case, adieu.”

“Why so?”

“I do not want you.”

“But you have claimed--”

“The aid of a gentleman, not the watchfulness of a spy.”

“The word is rather hard.”

“How are they called who follow others in spite of them?”

“They are indiscreet.”

“The word is too mild.”

“Well, madame, I perceive I must do as you wish.”

“Why did you deprive yourself of the merit of doing so at once?”

“Is there no merit in repentance?”

“And do you really repent?”

“I know nothing about it myself. But what I know is that I promise to do
all you wish if you allow me to accompany you where you are going.”

“And you will leave me then?”

“Yes.”

“Without waiting for my coming out again?”

“Yes.”

“Word of honor?”

“By the faith of a gentleman. Take my arm, and let us go.”

D’Artagnan offered his arm to Mme. Bonacieux, who willingly took it,
half laughing, half trembling, and both gained the top of Rue de la
Harpe. Arriving there, the young woman seemed to hesitate, as she had
before done in the Rue Vaugirard. She seemed, however, by certain signs,
to recognize a door, and approaching that door, “And now, monsieur,”
said she, “it is here I have business; a thousand thanks for your
honorable company, which has saved me from all the dangers to which,
alone, I was exposed. But the moment is come to keep your word; I have
reached my destination.”

“And you will have nothing to fear on your return?”

“I shall have nothing to fear but robbers.”

“And that is nothing?”

“What could they take from me? I have not a penny about me.”

“You forget that beautiful handkerchief with the coat of arms.”

“Which?”

“That which I found at your feet, and replaced in your pocket.”

“Hold your tongue, imprudent man! Do you wish to destroy me?”

“You see very plainly that there is still danger for you, since a single
word makes you tremble; and you confess that if that word were heard you
would be ruined. Come, come, madame!” cried d’Artagnan, seizing her
hands, and surveying her with an ardent glance, “come, be more generous.
Confide in me. Have you not read in my eyes that there is nothing but
devotion and sympathy in my heart?”

“Yes,” replied Mme. Bonacieux; “therefore, ask my own secrets, and I
will reveal them to you; but those of others--that is quite another
thing.”

“Very well,” said d’Artagnan, “I shall discover them; as these secrets
may have an influence over your life, these secrets must become mine.”

“Beware of what you do!” cried the young woman, in a manner so serious
as to make d’Artagnan start in spite of himself. “Oh, meddle in nothing
which concerns me. Do not seek to assist me in that which I am
accomplishing. This I ask of you in the name of the interest with which
I inspire you, in the name of the service you have rendered me and which
I never shall forget while I have life. Rather, place faith in what I
tell you. Have no more concern about me; I exist no longer for you, any
more than if you had never seen me.”

“Must Aramis do as much as I, madame?” said d’Artagnan, deeply piqued.

“This is the second or third time, monsieur, that you have repeated that
name, and yet I have told you that I do not know him.”

“You do not know the man at whose shutter you have just knocked? Indeed,
madame, you believe me too credulous!”

“Confess that it is for the sake of making me talk that you invent this
story and create this personage.”

“I invent nothing, madame; I create nothing. I only speak that exact
truth.”

“And you say that one of your friends lives in that house?”

“I say so, and I repeat it for the third time; that house is one
inhabited by my friend, and that friend is Aramis.”

“All this will be cleared up at a later period,” murmured the young
woman; “no, monsieur, be silent.”

“If you could see my heart,” said d’Artagnan, “you would there read so
much curiosity that you would pity me and so much love that you would
instantly satisfy my curiosity. We have nothing to fear from those who
love us.”

“You speak very suddenly of love, monsieur,” said the young woman,
shaking her head.

“That is because love has come suddenly upon me, and for the first time;
and because I am only twenty.”

The young woman looked at him furtively.

“Listen; I am already upon the scent,” resumed d’Artagnan. “About three
months ago I was near having a duel with Aramis concerning a
handkerchief resembling the one you showed to the woman in his
house--for a handkerchief marked in the same manner, I am sure.”

“Monsieur,” said the young woman, “you weary me very much, I assure you,
with your questions.”

“But you, madame, prudent as you are, think, if you were to be arrested
with that handkerchief, and that handkerchief were to be seized, would
you not be compromised?”

“In what way? The initials are only mine--C. B., Constance Bonacieux.”

“Or Camille de Bois-Tracy.”

“Silence, monsieur! Once again, silence! Ah, since the dangers I incur
on my own account cannot stop you, think of those you may yourself run!”

“Me?”

“Yes; there is peril of imprisonment, risk of life in knowing me.”

“Then I will not leave you.”

“Monsieur!” said the young woman, supplicating him and clasping her
hands together, “monsieur, in the name of heaven, by the honor of a
soldier, by the courtesy of a gentleman, depart! There, there midnight
sounds! That is the hour when I am expected.”

“Madame,” said the young man, bowing; “I can refuse nothing asked of me
thus. Be content; I will depart.”

“But you will not follow me; you will not watch me?”

“I will return home instantly.”

“Ah, I was quite sure you were a good and brave young man,” said Mme.
Bonacieux, holding out her hand to him, and placing the other upon the
knocker of a little door almost hidden in the wall.

D’Artagnan seized the hand held out to him, and kissed it ardently.

“Ah! I wish I had never seen you!” cried d’Artagnan, with that ingenuous
roughness which women often prefer to the affectations of politeness,
because it betrays the depths of the thought and proves that feeling
prevails over reason.

“Well!” resumed Mme. Bonacieux, in a voice almost caressing, and
pressing the hand of d’Artagnan, who had not relinquished hers, “well: I
will not say as much as you do; what is lost for today may not be lost
forever. Who knows, when I shall be at liberty, that I may not satisfy
your curiosity?”

“And will you make the same promise to my love?” cried d’Artagnan,
beside himself with joy.

“Oh, as to that, I do not engage myself. That depends upon the
sentiments with which you may inspire me.”

“Then today, madame--”

“Oh, today, I am no further than gratitude.”

“Ah! You are too charming,” said d’Artagnan, sorrowfully; “and you abuse
my love.”

“No, I use your generosity, that’s all. But be of good cheer; with
certain people, everything comes round.”

“Oh, you render me the happiest of men! Do not forget this evening--do
not forget that promise.”

“Be satisfied. In the proper time and place I will remember everything.
Now then, go, go, in the name of heaven! I was expected at sharp
midnight, and I am late.”

“By five minutes.”

“Yes; but in certain circumstances five minutes are five ages.”

“When one loves.”

“Well! And who told you I had no affair with a lover?”

“It is a man, then, who expects you?” cried d’Artagnan. “A man!”

“The discussion is going to begin again!” said Mme. Bonacieux, with a
half-smile which was not exempt from a tinge of impatience.

“No, no; I go, I depart! I believe in you, and I would have all the
merit of my devotion, even if that devotion were stupidity. Adieu,
madame, adieu!”

And as if he only felt strength to detach himself by a violent effort
from the hand he held, he sprang away, running, while Mme. Bonacieux
knocked, as at the shutter, three light and regular taps. When he had
gained the angle of the street, he turned. The door had been opened, and
shut again; the mercer’s pretty wife had disappeared.

D’Artagnan pursued his way. He had given his word not to watch Mme.
Bonacieux, and if his life had depended upon the spot to which she was
going or upon the person who should accompany her, d’Artagnan would have
returned home, since he had so promised. Five minutes later he was in
the Rue des Fossoyeurs.

“Poor Athos!” said he; “he will never guess what all this means. He will
have fallen asleep waiting for me, or else he will have returned home,
where he will have learned that a woman had been there. A woman with
Athos! After all,” continued d’Artagnan, “there was certainly one with
Aramis. All this is very strange; and I am curious to know how it will
end.”

“Badly, monsieur, badly!” replied a voice which the young man recognized
as that of Planchet; for, soliloquizing aloud, as very preoccupied
people do, he had entered the alley, at the end of which were the stairs
which led to his chamber.

“How, badly? What do you mean by that, you idiot?” asked d’Artagnan.
“What has happened?”

“All sorts of misfortunes.”

“What?”

“In the first place, Monsieur Athos is arrested.”

“Arrested! Athos arrested! What for?”

“He was found in your lodging; they took him for you.”

“And by whom was he arrested?”

“By Guards brought by the men in black whom you put to flight.”

“Why did he not tell them his name? Why did he not tell them he knew
nothing about this affair?”

“He took care not to do so, monsieur; on the contrary, he came up to me
and said, ‘It is your master that needs his liberty at this moment and
not I, since he knows everything and I know nothing. They will believe
he is arrested, and that will give him time; in three days I will tell
them who I am, and they cannot fail to let me go.’”

“Bravo, Athos! Noble heart!” murmured d’Artagnan. “I know him well
there! And what did the officers do?”

“Four conveyed him away, I don’t know where--to the Bastille or Fort
l’Eveque. Two remained with the men in black, who rummaged every place
and took all the papers. The last two mounted guard at the door during
this examination; then, when all was over, they went away, leaving the
house empty and exposed.”

“And Porthos and Aramis?”

“I could not find them; they did not come.”

“But they may come any moment, for you left word that I awaited them?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Well, don’t budge, then; if they come, tell them what has happened. Let
them wait for me at the Pomme-de-Pin. Here it would be dangerous; the
house may be watched. I will run to Monsieur de Treville to tell them
all this, and will meet them there.”

“Very well, monsieur,” said Planchet.

“But you will remain; you are not afraid?” said d’Artagnan, coming back
to recommend courage to his lackey.

“Be easy, monsieur,” said Planchet; “you do not know me yet. I am brave
when I set about it. It is all in beginning. Besides, I am a Picard.”

“Then it is understood,” said d’Artagnan; “you would rather be killed
than desert your post?”

“Yes, monsieur; and there is nothing I would not do to prove to Monsieur
that I am attached to him.”

“Good!” said d’Artagnan to himself. “It appears that the method I have
adopted with this boy is decidedly the best. I shall use it again upon
occasion.”

And with all the swiftness of his legs, already a little fatigued,
however, with the perambulations of the day, d’Artagnan directed his
course toward M. de Treville’s.

M de Treville was not at his hotel. His company was on guard at the
Louvre; he was at the Louvre with his company.

It was necessary to reach M. de Treville; it was important that he
should be informed of what was passing. D’Artagnan resolved to try and
enter the Louvre. His costume of Guardsman in the company of M.
Dessessart ought to be his passport.

He therefore went down the Rue des Petits Augustins, and came up to the
quay, in order to take the New Bridge. He had at first an idea of
crossing by the ferry; but on gaining the riverside, he had mechanically
put his hand into his pocket, and perceived that he had not wherewithal
to pay his passage.

As he gained the top of the Rue Guenegaud, he saw two persons coming out
of the Rue Dauphine whose appearance very much struck him. Of the two
persons who composed this group, one was a man and the other a woman.
The woman had the outline of Mme. Bonacieux; the man resembled Aramis so
much as to be mistaken for him.

Besides, the woman wore that black mantle which d’Artagnan could still
see outlined on the shutter of the Rue de Vaugirard and on the door of
the Rue de la Harpe; still further, the man wore the uniform of a
Musketeer.

The woman’s hood was pulled down, and the man held a handkerchief to his
face. Both, as this double precaution indicated, had an interest in not
being recognized.

They took the bridge. That was d’Artagnan’s road, as he was going to the
Louvre. D’Artagnan followed them.

He had not gone twenty steps before he became convinced that the woman
was really Mme. Bonacieux and that the man was Aramis.

He felt at that instant all the suspicions of jealousy agitating his
heart. He felt himself doubly betrayed, by his friend and by her whom he
already loved like a mistress. Mme. Bonacieux had declared to him, by
all the gods, that she did not know Aramis; and a quarter of an hour
after having made this assertion, he found her hanging on the arm of
Aramis.

D’Artagnan did not reflect that he had only known the mercer’s pretty
wife for three hours; that she owed him nothing but a little gratitude
for having delivered her from the men in black, who wished to carry her
off, and that she had promised him nothing. He considered himself an
outraged, betrayed, and ridiculed lover. Blood and anger mounted to his
face; he was resolved to unravel the mystery.

The young man and young woman perceived they were watched, and redoubled
their speed. D’Artagnan determined upon his course. He passed them, then
returned so as to meet them exactly before the Samaritaine, which was
illuminated by a lamp which threw its light over all that part of the
bridge.

D’Artagnan stopped before them, and they stopped before him.

“What do you want, monsieur?” demanded the Musketeer, recoiling a step,
and with a foreign accent, which proved to d’Artagnan that he was
deceived in one of his conjectures.

“It is not Aramis!” cried he.

“No, monsieur, it is not Aramis; and by your exclamation I perceive you
have mistaken me for another, and pardon you.”

“You pardon me?” cried d’Artagnan.

“Yes,” replied the stranger. “Allow me, then, to pass on, since it is
not with me you have anything to do.”

“You are right, monsieur, it is not with you that I have anything to do;
it is with Madame.”

“With Madame! You do not know her,” replied the stranger.

“You are deceived, monsieur; I know her very well.”

“Ah,” said Mme. Bonacieux; in a tone of reproach, “ah, monsieur, I had
your promise as a soldier and your word as a gentleman. I hoped to be
able to rely upon that.”

“And I, madame!” said d’Artagnan, embarrassed; “you promised me--”

“Take my arm, madame,” said the stranger, “and let us continue our way.”

D’Artagnan, however, stupefied, cast down, annihilated by all that
happened, stood, with crossed arms, before the Musketeer and Mme.
Bonacieux.

The Musketeer advanced two steps, and pushed d’Artagnan aside with his
hand. D’Artagnan made a spring backward and drew his sword. At the same
time, and with the rapidity of lightning, the stranger drew his.

“In the name of heaven, my Lord!” cried Mme. Bonacieux, throwing herself
between the combatants and seizing the swords with her hands.

“My Lord!” cried d’Artagnan, enlightened by a sudden idea, “my Lord!
Pardon me, monsieur, but you are not--”

“My Lord the Duke of Buckingham,” said Mme. Bonacieux, in an undertone;
“and now you may ruin us all.”

“My Lord, Madame, I ask a hundred pardons! But I love her, my Lord, and
was jealous. You know what it is to love, my Lord. Pardon me, and then
tell me how I can risk my life to serve your Grace?”

“You are a brave young man,” said Buckingham, holding out his hand to
d’Artagnan, who pressed it respectfully. “You offer me your services;
with the same frankness I accept them. Follow us at a distance of twenty
paces, as far as the Louvre, and if anyone watches us, slay him!”

D’Artagnan placed his naked sword under his arm, allowed the duke and
Mme. Bonacieux to take twenty steps ahead, and then followed them, ready
to execute the instructions of the noble and elegant minister of Charles
I.

Fortunately, he had no opportunity to give the duke this proof of his
devotion, and the young woman and the handsome Musketeer entered the
Louvre by the wicket of the Echelle without any interference.

As for d’Artagnan, he immediately repaired to the cabaret of the
Pomme-de-Pin, where he found Porthos and Aramis awaiting him. Without
giving them any explanation of the alarm and inconvenience he had caused
them, he told them that he had terminated the affair alone in which he
had for a moment believed he should need their assistance.

Meanwhile, carried away as we are by our narrative, we must leave our
three friends to themselves, and follow the Duke of Buckingham and his
guide through the labyrinths of the Louvre.




12 GEORGE VILLIERS, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM


Mme. Bonacieux and the duke entered the Louvre without difficulty. Mme.
Bonacieux was known to belong to the queen; the duke wore the uniform of
the Musketeers of M. de Treville, who, as we have said, were that
evening on guard. Besides, Germain was in the interests of the queen;
and if anything should happen, Mme. Bonacieux would be accused of having
introduced her lover into the Louvre, that was all. She took the risk
upon herself. Her reputation would be lost, it is true; but of what
value in the world was the reputation of the little wife of a mercer?

Once within the interior of the court, the duke and the young woman
followed the wall for the space of about twenty-five steps. This space
passed, Mme. Bonacieux pushed a little servants’ door, open by day but
generally closed at night. The door yielded. Both entered, and found
themselves in darkness; but Mme. Bonacieux was acquainted with all the
turnings and windings of this part of the Louvre, appropriated for the
people of the household. She closed the door after her, took the duke by
the hand, and after a few experimental steps, grasped a balustrade, put
her foot upon the bottom step, and began to ascend the staircase. The
duke counted two stories. She then turned to the right, followed the
course of a long corridor, descended a flight, went a few steps farther,
introduced a key into a lock, opened a door, and pushed the duke into an
apartment lighted only by a lamp, saying, “Remain here, my Lord Duke;
someone will come.” She then went out by the same door, which she
locked, so that the duke found himself literally a prisoner.

Nevertheless, isolated as he was, we must say that the Duke of
Buckingham did not experience an instant of fear. One of the salient
points of his character was the search for adventures and a love of
romance. Brave, rash, and enterprising, this was not the first time he
had risked his life in such attempts. He had learned that the pretended
message from Anne of Austria, upon the faith of which he had come to
Paris, was a snare; but instead of regaining England, he had, abusing
the position in which he had been placed, declared to the queen that he
would not depart without seeing her. The queen had at first positively
refused; but at length became afraid that the duke, if exasperated,
would commit some folly. She had already decided upon seeing him and
urging his immediate departure, when, on the very evening of coming to
this decision, Mme. Bonacieux, who was charged with going to fetch the
duke and conducting him to the Louvre, was abducted. For two days no one
knew what had become of her, and everything remained in suspense; but
once free, and placed in communication with Laporte, matters resumed
their course, and she accomplished the perilous enterprise which, but
for her arrest, would have been executed three days earlier.

Buckingham, left alone, walked toward a mirror. His Musketeer’s uniform
became him marvelously.

At thirty-five, which was then his age, he passed, with just title, for
the handsomest gentleman and the most elegant cavalier of France or
England.

The favorite of two kings, immensely rich, all-powerful in a kingdom
which he disordered at his fancy and calmed again at his caprice, George
Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, had lived one of those fabulous existences
which survive, in the course of centuries, to astonish posterity.

Sure of himself, convinced of his own power, certain that the laws which
rule other men could not reach him, he went straight to the object he
aimed at, even were this object were so elevated and so dazzling that it
would have been madness for any other even to have contemplated it. It
was thus he had succeeded in approaching several times the beautiful and
proud Anne of Austria, and in making himself loved by dazzling her.

George Villiers placed himself before the glass, as we have said,
restored the undulations to his beautiful hair, which the weight of his
hat had disordered, twisted his mustache, and, his heart swelling with
joy, happy and proud at being near the moment he had so long sighed for,
he smiled upon himself with pride and hope.

At this moment a door concealed in the tapestry opened, and a woman
appeared. Buckingham saw this apparition in the glass; he uttered a cry.
It was the queen!

Anne of Austria was then twenty-six or twenty-seven years of age; that
is to say, she was in the full splendor of her beauty.

Her carriage was that of a queen or a goddess; her eyes, which cast the
brilliancy of emeralds, were perfectly beautiful, and yet were at the
same time full of sweetness and majesty.

Her mouth was small and rosy; and although her underlip, like that of
all princes of the House of Austria, protruded slightly beyond the
other, it was eminently lovely in its smile, but as profoundly
disdainful in its contempt.

Her skin was admired for its velvety softness; her hands and arms were
of surpassing beauty, all the poets of the time singing them as
incomparable.

Lastly, her hair, which, from being light in her youth, had become
chestnut, and which she wore curled very plainly, and with much powder,
admirably set off her face, in which the most rigid critic could only
have desired a little less rouge, and the most fastidious sculptor a
little more fineness in the nose.

Buckingham remained for a moment dazzled. Never had Anne of Austria
appeared to him so beautiful, amid balls, fetes, or carousals, as she
appeared to him at this moment, dressed in a simple robe of white satin,
and accompanied by Donna Estafania--the only one of her Spanish women
who had not been driven from her by the jealousy of the king or by the
persecutions of Richelieu.

Anne of Austria took two steps forward. Buckingham threw himself at her
feet, and before the queen could prevent him, kissed the hem of her
robe.

“Duke, you already know that it is not I who caused you to be written
to.”

“Yes, yes, madame! Yes, your Majesty!” cried the duke. “I know that I
must have been mad, senseless, to believe that snow would become
animated or marble warm; but what then! They who love believe easily in
love. Besides, I have lost nothing by this journey because I see you.”

“Yes,” replied Anne, “but you know why and how I see you; because,
insensible to all my sufferings, you persist in remaining in a city
where, by remaining, you run the risk of your life, and make me run the
risk of my honor. I see you to tell you that everything separates
us--the depths of the sea, the enmity of kingdoms, the sanctity of vows.
It is sacrilege to struggle against so many things, my Lord. In short, I
see you to tell you that we must never see each other again.”

“Speak on, madame, speak on, Queen,” said Buckingham; “the sweetness of
your voice covers the harshness of your words. You talk of sacrilege!
Why, the sacrilege is the separation of two hearts formed by God for
each other.”

“My Lord,” cried the queen, “you forget that I have never said that I
love you.”

“But you have never told me that you did not love me; and truly, to
speak such words to me would be, on the part of your Majesty, too great
an ingratitude. For tell me, where can you find a love like mine--a love
which neither time, nor absence, nor despair can extinguish, a love
which contents itself with a lost ribbon, a stray look, or a chance
word? It is now three years, madame, since I saw you for the first time,
and during those three years I have loved you thus. Shall I tell you
each ornament of your toilet? Mark! I see you now. You were seated upon
cushions in the Spanish fashion; you wore a robe of green satin
embroidered with gold and silver, hanging sleeves knotted upon your
beautiful arms--those lovely arms--with large diamonds. You wore a close
ruff, a small cap upon your head of the same color as your robe, and in
that cap a heron’s feather. Hold! Hold! I shut my eyes, and I can see
you as you then were; I open them again, and I see what you are now--a
hundred times more beautiful!”

“What folly,” murmured Anne of Austria, who had not the courage to find
fault with the duke for having so well preserved her portrait in his
heart, “what folly to feed a useless passion with such remembrances!”

“And upon what then must I live? I have nothing but memory. It is my
happiness, my treasure, my hope. Every time I see you is a fresh diamond
which I enclose in the casket of my heart. This is the fourth which you
have let fall and I have picked up; for in three years, madame, I have
only seen you four times--the first, which I have described to you; the
second, at the mansion of Madame de Chevreuse; the third, in the gardens
of Amiens.”

“Duke,” said the queen, blushing, “never speak of that evening.”

“Oh, let us speak of it; on the contrary, let us speak of it! That is
the most happy and brilliant evening of my life! You remember what a
beautiful night it was? How soft and perfumed was the air; how lovely
the blue heavens and star-enameled sky! Ah, then, madame, I was able for
one instant to be alone with you. Then you were about to tell me
all--the isolation of your life, the griefs of your heart. You leaned
upon my arm--upon this, madame! I felt, in bending my head toward you,
your beautiful hair touch my cheek; and every time that it touched me I
trembled from head to foot. Oh, Queen! Queen! You do not know what
felicity from heaven, what joys from paradise, are comprised in a moment
like that. Take my wealth, my fortune, my glory, all the days I have to
live, for such an instant, for a night like that. For that night,
madame, that night you loved me, I will swear it.”

“My Lord, yes; it is possible that the influence of the place, the charm
of the beautiful evening, the fascination of your look--the thousand
circumstances, in short, which sometimes unite to destroy a woman--were
grouped around me on that fatal evening; but, my Lord, you saw the queen
come to the aid of the woman who faltered. At the first word you dared
to utter, at the first freedom to which I had to reply, I called for
help.”

“Yes, yes, that is true. And any other love but mine would have sunk
beneath this ordeal; but my love came out from it more ardent and more
eternal. You believed that you would fly from me by returning to Paris;
you believed that I would not dare to quit the treasure over which my
master had charged me to watch. What to me were all the treasures in the
world, or all the kings of the earth! Eight days after, I was back
again, madame. That time you had nothing to say to me; I had risked my
life and favor to see you but for a second. I did not even touch your
hand, and you pardoned me on seeing me so submissive and so repentant.”

“Yes, but calumny seized upon all those follies in which I took no part,
as you well know, my Lord. The king, excited by the cardinal, made a
terrible clamor. Madame de Vernet was driven from me, Putange was
exiled, Madame de Chevreuse fell into disgrace, and when you wished to
come back as ambassador to France, the king himself--remember, my
lord--the king himself opposed it.”

“Yes, and France is about to pay for her king’s refusal with a war. I am
not allowed to see you, madame, but you shall every day hear of me. What
object, think you, have this expedition to Re and this league with the
Protestants of La Rochelle which I am projecting? The pleasure of seeing
you. I have no hope of penetrating, sword in hand, to Paris, I know that
well. But this war may bring round a peace; this peace will require a
negotiator; that negotiator will be me. They will not dare to refuse me
then; and I will return to Paris, and will see you again, and will be
happy for an instant. Thousands of men, it is true, will have to pay for
my happiness with their lives; but what is that to me, provided I see
you again! All this is perhaps folly--perhaps insanity; but tell me what
woman has a lover more truly in love; what queen a servant more ardent?”

“My Lord, my Lord, you invoke in your defense things which accuse you
more strongly. All these proofs of love which you would give me are
almost crimes.”

“Because you do not love me, madame! If you loved me, you would view all
this otherwise. If you loved me, oh, if you loved me, that would be too
great happiness, and I should run mad. Ah, Madame de Chevreuse was less
cruel than you. Holland loved her, and she responded to his love.”

“Madame de Chevreuse was not queen,” murmured Anne of Austria, overcome,
in spite of herself, by the expression of so profound a passion.

“You would love me, then, if you were not queen! Madame, say that you
would love me then! I can believe that it is the dignity of your rank
alone which makes you cruel to me; I can believe that, had you been
Madame de Chevreuse, poor Buckingham might have hoped. Thanks for those
sweet words! Oh, my beautiful sovereign, a hundred times, thanks!”

“Oh, my Lord! You have ill understood, wrongly interpreted; I did not
mean to say--”

“Silence, silence!” cried the duke. “If I am happy in an error, do not
have the cruelty to lift me from it. You have told me yourself, madame,
that I have been drawn into a snare; I, perhaps, may leave my life in
it--for, although it may be strange, I have for some time had a
presentiment that I should shortly die.” And the duke smiled, with a
smile at once sad and charming.

“Oh, my God!” cried Anne of Austria, with an accent of terror which
proved how much greater an interest she took in the duke than she
ventured to tell.

“I do not tell you this, madame, to terrify you; no, it is even
ridiculous for me to name it to you, and, believe me, I take no heed of
such dreams. But the words you have just spoken, the hope you have
almost given me, will have richly paid all--were it my life.”

“Oh, but I,” said Anne, “I also, duke, have had presentiments; I also
have had dreams. I dreamed that I saw you lying bleeding, wounded.”

“In the left side, was it not, and with a knife?” interrupted
Buckingham.

“Yes, it was so, my Lord, it was so--in the left side, and with a knife.
Who can possibly have told you I had had that dream? I have imparted it
to no one but my God, and that in my prayers.”

“I ask for no more. You love me, madame; it is enough.”

“I love you, I?”

“Yes, yes. Would God send the same dreams to you as to me if you did not
love me? Should we have the same presentiments if our existences did not
touch at the heart? You love me, my beautiful queen, and you will weep
for me?”

“Oh, my God, my God!” cried Anne of Austria, “this is more than I can
bear. In the name of heaven, Duke, leave me, go! I do not know whether I
love you or love you not; but what I know is that I will not be
perjured. Take pity on me, then, and go! Oh, if you are struck in
France, if you die in France, if I could imagine that your love for me
was the cause of your death, I could not console myself; I should run
mad. Depart then, depart, I implore you!”

“Oh, how beautiful you are thus! Oh, how I love you!” said Buckingham.

“Go, go, I implore you, and return hereafter! Come back as ambassador,
come back as minister, come back surrounded with guards who will defend
you, with servants who will watch over you, and then I shall no longer
fear for your days, and I shall be happy in seeing you.”

“Oh, is this true what you say?”

“Yes.”

“Oh, then, some pledge of your indulgence, some object which came from
you, and may remind me that I have not been dreaming; something you have
worn, and that I may wear in my turn--a ring, a necklace, a chain.”

“Will you depart--will you depart, if I give you that you demand?”

“Yes.”

“This very instant?”

“Yes.”

“You will leave France, you will return to England?”

“I will, I swear to you.”

“Wait, then, wait.”

Anne of Austria re-entered her apartment, and came out again almost
immediately, holding a rosewood casket in her hand, with her cipher
encrusted with gold.

“Here, my Lord, here,” said she, “keep this in memory of me.”

Buckingham took the casket, and fell a second time on his knees.

“You have promised me to go,” said the queen.

“And I keep my word. Your hand, madame, your hand, and I depart!”

Anne of Austria stretched forth her hand, closing her eyes, and leaning
with the other upon Estafania, for she felt that her strength was about
to fail her.

Buckingham pressed his lips passionately to that beautiful hand, and
then rising, said, “Within six months, if I am not dead, I shall have
seen you again, madame--even if I have to overturn the world.” And
faithful to the promise he had made, he rushed out of the apartment.

In the corridor he met Mme. Bonacieux, who waited for him, and who, with
the same precautions and the same good luck, conducted him out of the
Louvre.




13 MONSIEUR BONACIEUX


There was in all this, as may have been observed, one personage
concerned, of whom, notwithstanding his precarious position, we have
appeared to take but very little notice. This personage was M.
Bonacieux, the respectable martyr of the political and amorous intrigues
which entangled themselves so nicely together at this gallant and
chivalric period.

Fortunately, the reader may remember, or may not remember--fortunately
we have promised not to lose sight of him.

The officers who arrested him conducted him straight to the Bastille,
where he passed trembling before a party of soldiers who were loading
their muskets. Thence, introduced into a half-subterranean gallery, he
became, on the part of those who had brought him, the object of the
grossest insults and the harshest treatment. The officers perceived that
they had not to deal with a gentleman, and they treated him like a very
peasant.

At the end of half an hour or thereabouts, a clerk came to put an end to
his tortures, but not to his anxiety, by giving the order to conduct M.
Bonacieux to the Chamber of Examination. Ordinarily, prisoners were
interrogated in their cells; but they did not do so with M. Bonacieux.

Two guards attended the mercer who made him traverse a court and enter a
corridor in which were three sentinels, opened a door and pushed him
unceremoniously into a low room, where the only furniture was a table, a
chair, and a commissary. The commissary was seated in the chair, and was
writing at the table.

The two guards led the prisoner toward the table, and upon a sign from
the commissary drew back so far as to be unable to hear anything.

The commissary, who had till this time held his head down over his
papers, looked up to see what sort of person he had to do with. This
commissary was a man of very repulsive mien, with a pointed nose, with
yellow and salient cheek bones, with eyes small but keen and
penetrating, and an expression of countenance resembling at once the
polecat and the fox. His head, supported by a long and flexible neck,
issued from his large black robe, balancing itself with a motion very
much like that of the tortoise thrusting his head out of his shell. He
began by asking M. Bonacieux his name, age, condition, and abode.

The accused replied that his name was Jacques Michel Bonacieux, that he
was fifty-one years old, a retired mercer, and lived Rue des Fossoyeurs,
No. 14.

The commissary then, instead of continuing to interrogate him, made him
a long speech upon the danger there is for an obscure citizen to meddle
with public matters. He complicated this exordium by an exposition in
which he painted the power and the deeds of the cardinal, that
incomparable minister, that conqueror of past ministers, that example
for ministers to come--deeds and power which none could thwart with
impunity.

After this second part of his discourse, fixing his hawk’s eye upon poor
Bonacieux, he bade him reflect upon the gravity of his situation.

The reflections of the mercer were already made; he cursed the instant
when M. Laporte formed the idea of marrying him to his goddaughter, and
particularly the moment when that goddaughter had been received as Lady
of the Linen to her Majesty.

At bottom the character of M. Bonacieux was one of profound selfishness
mixed with sordid avarice, the whole seasoned with extreme cowardice.
The love with which his young wife had inspired him was a secondary
sentiment, and was not strong enough to contend with the primitive
feelings we have just enumerated. Bonacieux indeed reflected on what had
just been said to him.

“But, Monsieur Commissary,” said he, calmly, “believe that I know and
appreciate, more than anybody, the merit of the incomparable eminence by
whom we have the honor to be governed.”

“Indeed?” asked the commissary, with an air of doubt. “If that is really
so, how came you in the Bastille?”

“How I came there, or rather why I am there,” replied Bonacieux, “that
is entirely impossible for me to tell you, because I don’t know myself;
but to a certainty it is not for having, knowingly at least, disobliged
Monsieur the Cardinal.”

“You must, nevertheless, have committed a crime, since you are here and
are accused of high treason.”

“Of high treason!” cried Bonacieux, terrified; “of high treason! How is
it possible for a poor mercer, who detests Huguenots and who abhors
Spaniards, to be accused of high treason? Consider, monsieur, the thing
is absolutely impossible.”

“Monsieur Bonacieux,” said the commissary, looking at the accused as if
his little eyes had the faculty of reading to the very depths of hearts,
“you have a wife?”

“Yes, monsieur,” replied the mercer, in a tremble, feeling that it was
at this point affairs were likely to become perplexing; “that is to say,
I HAD one.”

“What, you ‘had one’? What have you done with her, then, if you have her
no longer?”

“They have abducted her, monsieur.”

“They have abducted her? Ah!”

Bonacieux inferred from this “Ah” that the affair grew more and more
intricate.

“They have abducted her,” added the commissary; “and do you know the man
who has committed this deed?”

“I think I know him.”

“Who is he?”

“Remember that I affirm nothing, Monsieur the Commissary, and that I
only suspect.”

“Whom do you suspect? Come, answer freely.”

M Bonacieux was in the greatest perplexity possible. Had he better deny
everything or tell everything? By denying all, it might be suspected
that he must know too much to avow; by confessing all he might prove his
good will. He decided, then, to tell all.

“I suspect,” said he, “a tall, dark man, of lofty carriage, who has the
air of a great lord. He has followed us several times, as I think, when
I have waited for my wife at the wicket of the Louvre to escort her
home.”

The commissary now appeared to experience a little uneasiness.

“And his name?” said he.

“Oh, as to his name, I know nothing about it; but if I were ever to meet
him, I should recognize him in an instant, I will answer for it, were he
among a thousand persons.”

The face of the commissary grew still darker.

“You should recognize him among a thousand, say you?” continued he.

“That is to say,” cried Bonacieux, who saw he had taken a false step,
“that is to say--”

“You have answered that you should recognize him,” said the commissary.
“That is all very well, and enough for today; before we proceed further,
someone must be informed that you know the ravisher of your wife.”

“But I have not told you that I know him!” cried Bonacieux, in despair.
“I told you, on the contrary--”

“Take away the prisoner,” said the commissary to the two guards.

“Where must we place him?” demanded the chief.

“In a dungeon.”

“Which?”

“Good Lord! In the first one handy, provided it is safe,” said the
commissary, with an indifference which penetrated poor Bonacieux with
horror.

“Alas, alas!” said he to himself, “misfortune is over my head; my wife
must have committed some frightful crime. They believe me her
accomplice, and will punish me with her. She must have spoken; she must
have confessed everything--a woman is so weak! A dungeon! The first he
comes to! That’s it! A night is soon passed; and tomorrow to the wheel,
to the gallows! Oh, my God, my God, have pity on me!”

Without listening the least in the world to the lamentations of M.
Bonacieux--lamentations to which, besides, they must have been pretty
well accustomed--the two guards took the prisoner each by an arm, and
led him away, while the commissary wrote a letter in haste and
dispatched it by an officer in waiting.

Bonacieux could not close his eyes; not because his dungeon was so very
disagreeable, but because his uneasiness was so great. He sat all night
on his stool, starting at the least noise; and when the first rays of
the sun penetrated into his chamber, the dawn itself appeared to him to
have taken funereal tints.

All at once he heard his bolts drawn, and made a terrified bound. He
believed they were come to conduct him to the scaffold; so that when he
saw merely and simply, instead of the executioner he expected, only his
commissary of the preceding evening, attended by his clerk, he was ready
to embrace them both.

“Your affair has become more complicated since yesterday evening, my
good man, and I advise you to tell the whole truth; for your repentance
alone can remove the anger of the cardinal.”

“Why, I am ready to tell everything,” cried Bonacieux, “at least, all
that I know. Interrogate me, I entreat you!”

“Where is your wife, in the first place?”

“Why, did not I tell you she had been stolen from me?”

“Yes, but yesterday at five o’clock in the afternoon, thanks to you, she
escaped.”

“My wife escaped!” cried Bonacieux. “Oh, unfortunate creature! Monsieur,
if she has escaped, it is not my fault, I swear.”

“What business had you, then, to go into the chamber of Monsieur
d’Artagnan, your neighbor, with whom you had a long conference during
the day?”

“Ah, yes, Monsieur Commissary; yes, that is true, and I confess that I
was in the wrong. I did go to Monsieur d’Artagnan’s.”

“What was the aim of that visit?”

“To beg him to assist me in finding my wife. I believed I had a right to
endeavor to find her. I was deceived, as it appears, and I ask your
pardon.”

“And what did Monsieur d’Artagnan reply?”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan promised me his assistance; but I soon found out
that he was betraying me.”

“You impose upon justice. Monsieur d’Artagnan made a compact with you;
and in virtue of that compact put to flight the police who had arrested
your wife, and has placed her beyond reach.”

“M. d’Artagnan has abducted my wife! Come now, what are you telling me?”

“Fortunately, Monsieur d’Artagnan is in our hands, and you shall be
confronted with him.”

“By my faith, I ask no better,” cried Bonacieux; “I shall not be sorry
to see the face of an acquaintance.”

“Bring in the Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the commissary to the guards.
The two guards led in Athos.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the commissary, addressing Athos, “declare
all that passed yesterday between you and Monsieur.”

“But,” cried Bonacieux, “this is not Monsieur d’Artagnan whom you show
me.”

“What! Not Monsieur d’Artagnan?” exclaimed the commissary.

“Not the least in the world,” replied Bonacieux.

“What is this gentleman’s name?” asked the commissary.

“I cannot tell you; I don’t know him.”

“How! You don’t know him?”

“No.”

“Did you never see him?”

“Yes, I have seen him, but I don’t know what he calls himself.”

“Your name?” replied the commissary.

“Athos,” replied the Musketeer.

“But that is not a man’s name; that is the name of a mountain,” cried
the poor questioner, who began to lose his head.

“That is my name,” said Athos, quietly.

“But you said that your name was d’Artagnan.”

“Who, I?”

“Yes, you.”

“Somebody said to me, ‘You are Monsieur d’Artagnan?’ I answered, ‘You
think so?’ My guards exclaimed that they were sure of it. I did not wish
to contradict them; besides, I might be deceived.”

“Monsieur, you insult the majesty of justice.”

“Not at all,” said Athos, calmly.

“You are Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“You see, monsieur, that you say it again.”

“But I tell you, Monsieur Commissary,” cried Bonacieux, in his turn,
“there is not the least doubt about the matter. Monsieur d’Artagnan is
my tenant, although he does not pay me my rent--and even better on that
account ought I to know him. Monsieur d’Artagnan is a young man,
scarcely nineteen or twenty, and this gentleman must be thirty at least.
Monsieur d’Artagnan is in Monsieur Dessessart’s Guards, and this
gentleman is in the company of Monsieur de Treville’s Musketeers. Look
at his uniform, Monsieur Commissary, look at his uniform!”

“That’s true,” murmured the commissary; “PARDIEU, that’s true.”

At this moment the door was opened quickly, and a messenger, introduced
by one of the gatekeepers of the Bastille, gave a letter to the
commissary.

“Oh, unhappy woman!” cried the commissary.

“How? What do you say? Of whom do you speak? It is not of my wife, I
hope!”

“On the contrary, it is of her. Yours is a pretty business.”

“But,” said the agitated mercer, “do me the pleasure, monsieur, to tell
me how my own proper affair can become worse by anything my wife does
while I am in prison?”

“Because that which she does is part of a plan concerted between you--of
an infernal plan.”

“I swear to you, Monsieur Commissary, that you are in the profoundest
error, that I know nothing in the world about what my wife had to do,
that I am entirely a stranger to what she has done; and that if she has
committed any follies, I renounce her, I abjure her, I curse her!”

“Bah!” said Athos to the commissary, “if you have no more need of me,
send me somewhere. Your Monsieur Bonacieux is very tiresome.”

The commissary designated by the same gesture Athos and Bonacieux, “Let
them be guarded more closely than ever.”

“And yet,” said Athos, with his habitual calmness, “if it be Monsieur
d’Artagnan who is concerned in this matter, I do not perceive how I can
take his place.”

“Do as I bade you,” cried the commissary, “and preserve absolute
secrecy. You understand!”

Athos shrugged his shoulders, and followed his guards silently, while M.
Bonacieux uttered lamentations enough to break the heart of a tiger.

They locked the mercer in the same dungeon where he had passed the
night, and left him to himself during the day. Bonacieux wept all day,
like a true mercer, not being at all a military man, as he himself
informed us. In the evening, about nine o’clock, at the moment he had
made up his mind to go to bed, he heard steps in his corridor. These
steps drew near to his dungeon, the door was thrown open, and the guards
appeared.

“Follow me,” said an officer, who came up behind the guards.

“Follow you!” cried Bonacieux, “follow you at this hour! Where, my God?”

“Where we have orders to lead you.”

“But that is not an answer.”

“It is, nevertheless, the only one we can give.”

“Ah, my God, my God!” murmured the poor mercer, “now, indeed, I am
lost!” And he followed the guards who came for him, mechanically and
without resistance.

He passed along the same corridor as before, crossed one court, then a
second side of a building; at length, at the gate of the entrance court
he found a carriage surrounded by four guards on horseback. They made
him enter this carriage, the officer placed himself by his side, the
door was locked, and they were left in a rolling prison. The carriage
was put in motion as slowly as a funeral car. Through the closely
fastened windows the prisoner could perceive the houses and the
pavement, that was all; but, true Parisian as he was, Bonacieux could
recognize every street by the milestones, the signs, and the lamps. At
the moment of arriving at St. Paul--the spot where such as were
condemned at the Bastille were executed--he was near fainting and
crossed himself twice. He thought the carriage was about to stop there.
The carriage, however, passed on.

Farther on, a still greater terror seized him on passing by the cemetery
of St. Jean, where state criminals were buried. One thing, however,
reassured him; he remembered that before they were buried their heads
were generally cut off, and he felt that his head was still on his
shoulders. But when he saw the carriage take the way to La Greve, when
he perceived the pointed roof of the Hotel de Ville, and the carriage
passed under the arcade, he believed it was over with him. He wished to
confess to the officer, and upon his refusal, uttered such pitiable
cries that the officer told him that if he continued to deafen him thus,
he should put a gag in his mouth.

This measure somewhat reassured Bonacieux. If they meant to execute him
at La Greve, it could scarcely be worth while to gag him, as they had
nearly reached the place of execution. Indeed, the carriage crossed the
fatal spot without stopping. There remained, then, no other place to
fear but the Traitor’s Cross; the carriage was taking the direct road to
it.

This time there was no longer any doubt; it was at the Traitor’s Cross
that lesser criminals were executed. Bonacieux had flattered himself in
believing himself worthy of St. Paul or of the Place de Greve; it was at
the Traitor’s Cross that his journey and his destiny were about to end!
He could not yet see that dreadful cross, but he felt somehow as if it
were coming to meet him. When he was within twenty paces of it, he heard
a noise of people and the carriage stopped. This was more than poor
Bonacieux could endure, depressed as he was by the successive emotions
which he had experienced; he uttered a feeble groan which night have
been taken for the last sigh of a dying man, and fainted.




14 THE MAN OF MEUNG


The crowd was caused, not by the expectation of a man to be hanged, but
by the contemplation of a man who was hanged.

The carriage, which had been stopped for a minute, resumed its way,
passed through the crowd, threaded the Rue St. Honore, turned into the
Rue des Bons Enfants, and stopped before a low door.

The door opened; two guards received Bonacieux in their arms from the
officer who supported him. They carried him through an alley, up a
flight of stairs, and deposited him in an antechamber.

All these movements had been effected mechanically, as far as he was
concerned. He had walked as one walks in a dream; he had a glimpse of
objects as through a fog. His ears had perceived sounds without
comprehending them; he might have been executed at that moment without
his making a single gesture in his own defense or uttering a cry to
implore mercy.

He remained on the bench, with his back leaning against the wall and his
hands hanging down, exactly on the spot where the guards placed him.

On looking around him, however, as he could perceive no threatening
object, as nothing indicated that he ran any real danger, as the bench
was comfortably covered with a well-stuffed cushion, as the wall was
ornamented with a beautiful Cordova leather, and as large red damask
curtains, fastened back by gold clasps, floated before the window, he
perceived by degrees that his fear was exaggerated, and he began to turn
his head to the right and the left, upward and downward.

At this movement, which nobody opposed, he resumed a little courage, and
ventured to draw up one leg and then the other. At length, with the help
of his two hands he lifted himself from the bench, and found himself on
his feet.

At this moment an officer with a pleasant face opened a door, continued
to exchange some words with a person in the next chamber and then came
up to the prisoner. “Is your name Bonacieux?” said he.

“Yes, Monsieur Officer,” stammered the mercer, more dead than alive, “at
your service.”

“Come in,” said the officer.

And he moved out of the way to let the mercer pass. The latter obeyed
without reply, and entered the chamber, where he appeared to be
expected.

It was a large cabinet, close and stifling, with the walls furnished
with arms offensive and defensive, and in which there was already a
fire, although it was scarcely the end of the month of September. A
square table, covered with books and papers, upon which was unrolled an
immense plan of the city of La Rochelle, occupied the center of the
room.

Standing before the chimney was a man of middle height, of a haughty,
proud mien; with piercing eyes, a large brow, and a thin face, which was
made still longer by a ROYAL (or IMPERIAL, as it is now called),
surmounted by a pair of mustaches. Although this man was scarcely
thirty-six or thirty-seven years of age, hair, mustaches, and royal, all
began to be gray. This man, except a sword, had all the appearance of a
soldier; and his buff boots, still slightly covered with dust, indicated
that he had been on horseback in the course of the day.

This man was Armand Jean Duplessis, Cardinal de Richelieu; not such as
he is now represented--broken down like an old man, suffering like a
martyr, his body bent, his voice failing, buried in a large armchair as
in an anticipated tomb; no longer living but by the strength of his
genius, and no longer maintaining the struggle with Europe but by the
eternal application of his thoughts--but such as he really was at this
period; that is to say, an active and gallant cavalier, already weak of
body, but sustained by that moral power which made of him one of the
most extraordinary men that ever lived, preparing, after having
supported the Duc de Nevers in his duchy of Mantua, after having taken
Nimes, Castres, and Uzes, to drive the English from the Isle of Re and
lay siege to La Rochelle.

At first sight, nothing denoted the cardinal; and it was impossible for
those who did not know his face to guess in whose presence they were.

The poor mercer remained standing at the door, while the eyes of the
personage we have just described were fixed upon him, and appeared to
wish to penetrate even into the depths of the past.

“Is this that Bonacieux?” asked he, after a moment of silence.

“Yes, monseigneur,” replied the officer.

“That’s well. Give me those papers, and leave us.”

The officer took from the table the papers pointed out, gave them to him
who asked for them, bowed to the ground, and retired.

Bonacieux recognized in these papers his interrogatories of the
Bastille. From time to time the man by the chimney raised his eyes from
the writings, and plunged them like poniards into the heart of the poor
mercer.

At the end of ten minutes of reading and ten seconds of examination, the
cardinal was satisfied.

“That head has never conspired,” murmured he, “but it matters not; we
will see.”

“You are accused of high treason,” said the cardinal, slowly.

“So I have been told already, monseigneur,” cried Bonacieux, giving his
interrogator the title he had heard the officer give him, “but I swear
to you that I know nothing about it.”

The cardinal repressed a smile.

“You have conspired with your wife, with Madame de Chevreuse, and with
my Lord Duke of Buckingham.”

“Indeed, monseigneur,” responded the mercer, “I have heard her pronounce
all those names.”

“And on what occasion?”

“She said that the Cardinal de Richelieu had drawn the Duke of
Buckingham to Paris to ruin him and to ruin the queen.”

“She said that?” cried the cardinal, with violence.

“Yes, monseigneur, but I told her she was wrong to talk about such
things; and that his Eminence was incapable--”

“Hold your tongue! You are stupid,” replied the cardinal.

“That’s exactly what my wife said, monseigneur.”

“Do you know who carried off your wife?”

“No, monseigneur.”

“You have suspicions, nevertheless?”

“Yes, monseigneur; but these suspicions appeared to be disagreeable to
Monsieur the Commissary, and I no longer have them.”

“Your wife has escaped. Did you know that?”

“No, monseigneur. I learned it since I have been in prison, and that
from the conversation of Monsieur the Commissary--an amiable man.”

The cardinal repressed another smile.

“Then you are ignorant of what has become of your wife since her
flight.”

“Absolutely, monseigneur; but she has most likely returned to the
Louvre.”

“At one o’clock this morning she had not returned.”

“My God! What can have become of her, then?”

“We shall know, be assured. Nothing is concealed from the cardinal; the
cardinal knows everything.”

“In that case, monseigneur, do you believe the cardinal will be so kind
as to tell me what has become of my wife?”

“Perhaps he may; but you must, in the first place, reveal to the
cardinal all you know of your wife’s relations with Madame de
Chevreuse.”

“But, monseigneur, I know nothing about them; I have never seen her.”

“When you went to fetch your wife from the Louvre, did you always return
directly home?”

“Scarcely ever; she had business to transact with linen drapers, to
whose houses I conducted her.”

“And how many were there of these linen drapers?”

“Two, monseigneur.”

“And where did they live?”

“One in Rue de Vaugirard, the other Rue de la Harpe.”

“Did you go into these houses with her?”

“Never, monseigneur; I waited at the door.”

“And what excuse did she give you for entering all alone?”

“She gave me none; she told me to wait, and I waited.”

“You are a very complacent husband, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux,” said
the cardinal.

“He calls me his dear Monsieur,” said the mercer to himself. “PESTE!
Matters are going all right.”

“Should you know those doors again?”

“Yes.”

“Do you know the numbers?”

“Yes.”

“What are they?”

“No. 25 in the Rue de Vaugirard; 75 in the Rue de la Harpe.”

“That’s well,” said the cardinal.

At these words he took up a silver bell, and rang it; the officer
entered.

“Go,” said he, in a subdued voice, “and find Rochefort. Tell him to come
to me immediately, if he has returned.”

“The count is here,” said the officer, “and requests to speak with your
Eminence instantly.”

“Let him come in, then!” said the cardinal, quickly.

The officer sprang out of the apartment with that alacrity which all the
servants of the cardinal displayed in obeying him.

“To your Eminence!” murmured Bonacieux, rolling his eyes round in
astonishment.

Five seconds has scarcely elapsed after the disappearance of the
officer, when the door opened, and a new personage entered.

“It is he!” cried Bonacieux.

“He! What he?” asked the cardinal.

“The man who abducted my wife.”

The cardinal rang a second time. The officer reappeared.

“Place this man in the care of his guards again, and let him wait till I
send for him.”

“No, monseigneur, no, it is not he!” cried Bonacieux; “no, I was
deceived. This is quite another man, and does not resemble him at all.
Monsieur is, I am sure, an honest man.”

“Take away that fool!” said the cardinal.

The officer took Bonacieux by the arm, and led him into the antechamber,
where he found his two guards.

The newly introduced personage followed Bonacieux impatiently with his
eyes till he had gone out; and the moment the door closed, “They have
seen each other;” said he, approaching the cardinal eagerly.

“Who?” asked his Eminence.

“He and she.”

“The queen and the duke?” cried Richelieu.

“Yes.”

“Where?”

“At the Louvre.”

“Are you sure of it?”

“Perfectly sure.”

“Who told you of it?”

“Madame de Lannoy, who is devoted to your Eminence, as you know.”

“Why did she not let me know sooner?”

“Whether by chance or mistrust, the queen made Madame de Surgis sleep in
her chamber, and detained her all day.”

“Well, we are beaten! Now let us try to take our revenge.”

“I will assist you with all my heart, monseigneur; be assured of that.”

“How did it come about?”

“At half past twelve the queen was with her women--”

“Where?”

“In her bedchamber--”

“Go on.”

“When someone came and brought her a handkerchief from her laundress.”

“And then?”

“The queen immediately exhibited strong emotion; and despite the rouge
with which her face was covered evidently turned pale--”

“And then, and then?”

“She then arose, and with altered voice, ‘Ladies,’ said she, ‘wait for
me ten minutes, I shall soon return.’ She then opened the door of her
alcove, and went out.”

“Why did not Madame de Lannoy come and inform you instantly?”

“Nothing was certain; besides, her Majesty had said, ‘Ladies, wait for
me,’ and she did not dare to disobey the queen.”

“How long did the queen remain out of the chamber?”

“Three-quarters of an hour.”

“None of her women accompanied her?”

“Only Donna Estafania.”

“Did she afterward return?”

“Yes; but only to take a little rosewood casket, with her cipher upon
it, and went out again immediately.”

“And when she finally returned, did she bring that casket with her?”

“No.”

“Does Madame de Lannoy know what was in that casket?”

“Yes; the diamond studs which his Majesty gave the queen.”

“And she came back without this casket?”

“Yes.”

“Madame de Lannoy, then, is of opinion that she gave them to
Buckingham?”

“She is sure of it.”

“How can she be so?”

“In the course of the day Madame de Lannoy, in her quality of tire-woman
of the queen, looked for this casket, appeared uneasy at not finding it,
and at length asked information of the queen.”

“And then the queen?”

“The queen became exceedingly red, and replied that having in the
evening broken one of those studs, she had sent it to her goldsmith to
be repaired.”

“He must be called upon, and so ascertain if the thing be true or not.”

“I have just been with him.”

“And the goldsmith?”

“The goldsmith has heard nothing of it.”

“Well, well! Rochefort, all is not lost; and perhaps--perhaps everything
is for the best.”

“The fact is that I do not doubt your Eminence’s genius--”

“Will repair the blunders of his agent--is that it?”

“That is exactly what I was going to say, if your Eminence had let me
finish my sentence.”

“Meanwhile, do you know where the Duchesse de Chevreuse and the Duke of
Buckingham are now concealed?”

“No, monseigneur; my people could tell me nothing on that head.”

“But I know.”

“You, monseigneur?”

“Yes; or at least I guess. They were, one in the Rue de Vaugirard, No.
25; the other in the Rue de la Harpe, No. 75.”

“Does your Eminence command that they both be instantly arrested?”

“It will be too late; they will be gone.”

“But still, we can make sure that they are so.”

“Take ten men of my Guardsmen, and search the two houses thoroughly.”

“Instantly, monseigneur.” And Rochefort went hastily out of the
apartment.

The cardinal, being left alone, reflected for an instant and then rang
the bell a third time. The same officer appeared.

“Bring the prisoner in again,” said the cardinal.

M Bonacieux was introduced afresh, and upon a sign from the cardinal,
the officer retired.

“You have deceived me!” said the cardinal, sternly.

“I,” cried Bonacieux, “I deceive your Eminence!”

“Your wife, in going to Rue de Vaugirard and Rue de la Harpe, did not go
to find linen drapers.”

“Then why did she go, just God?”

“She went to meet the Duchesse de Chevreuse and the Duke of Buckingham.”

“Yes,” cried Bonacieux, recalling all his remembrances of the
circumstances, “yes, that’s it. Your Eminence is right. I told my wife
several times that it was surprising that linen drapers should live in
such houses as those, in houses that had no signs; but she always
laughed at me. Ah, monseigneur!” continued Bonacieux, throwing himself
at his Eminence’s feet, “ah, how truly you are the cardinal, the great
cardinal, the man of genius whom all the world reveres!”

The cardinal, however contemptible might be the triumph gained over so
vulgar a being as Bonacieux, did not the less enjoy it for an instant;
then, almost immediately, as if a fresh thought has occurred, a smile
played upon his lips, and he said, offering his hand to the mercer,
“Rise, my friend, you are a worthy man.”

“The cardinal has touched me with his hand! I have touched the hand of
the great man!” cried Bonacieux. “The great man has called me his
friend!”

“Yes, my friend, yes,” said the cardinal, with that paternal tone which
he sometimes knew how to assume, but which deceived none who knew him;
“and as you have been unjustly suspected, well, you must be indemnified.
Here, take this purse of a hundred pistoles, and pardon me.”

“I pardon you, monseigneur!” said Bonacieux, hesitating to take the
purse, fearing, doubtless, that this pretended gift was but a
pleasantry. “But you are able to have me arrested, you are able to have
me tortured, you are able to have me hanged; you are the master, and I
could not have the least word to say. Pardon you, monseigneur! You
cannot mean that!”

“Ah, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, you are generous in this matter. I see
it and I thank you for it. Thus, then, you will take this bag, and you
will go away without being too malcontent.”

“I go away enchanted.”

“Farewell, then, or rather, AU REVOIR!”

“Whenever Monseigneur wishes, I shall be firmly at the orders of his
Eminence.”

“That will be often, be assured, for I have found your conversation
quite charming.”

“Oh! Monseigneur!”

“AU REVOIR, Monsieur Bonacieux, AU REVOIR.”

And the cardinal made him a sign with his hand, to which Bonacieux
replied by bowing to the ground. He then went out backward, and when he
was in the antechamber the cardinal heard him, in his enthusiasm, crying
aloud, “Long life to the Monseigneur! Long life to his Eminence! Long
life to the great cardinal!” The cardinal listened with a smile to this
vociferous manifestation of the feelings of M. Bonacieux; and then, when
Bonacieux’s cries were no longer audible, “Good!” said he, “that man
would henceforward lay down his life for me.” And the cardinal began to
examine with the greatest attention the map of La Rochelle, which, as we
have said, lay open on the desk, tracing with a pencil the line in which
the famous dyke was to pass which, eighteen months later, shut up the
port of the besieged city. As he was in the deepest of his strategic
meditations, the door opened, and Rochefort returned.

“Well?” said the cardinal, eagerly, rising with a promptitude which
proved the degree of importance he attached to the commission with which
he had charged the count.

“Well,” said the latter, “a young woman of about twenty-six or
twenty-eight years of age, and a man of from thirty-five to forty, have
indeed lodged at the two houses pointed out by your Eminence; but the
woman left last night, and the man this morning.”

“It was they!” cried the cardinal, looking at the clock; “and now it is
too late to have them pursued. The duchess is at Tours, and the duke at
Boulogne. It is in London they must be found.”

“What are your Eminence’s orders?”

“Not a word of what has passed. Let the queen remain in perfect
security; let her be ignorant that we know her secret. Let her believe
that we are in search of some conspiracy or other. Send me the keeper of
the seals, Seguier.”

“And that man, what has your Eminence done with him?”

“What man?” asked the cardinal.

“That Bonacieux.”

“I have done with him all that could be done. I have made him a spy upon
his wife.”

The Comte de Rochefort bowed like a man who acknowledges the superiority
of the master as great, and retired.

Left alone, the cardinal seated himself again and wrote a letter, which
he secured with his special seal. Then he rang. The officer entered for
the fourth time.

“Tell Vitray to come to me,” said he, “and tell him to get ready for a
journey.”

An instant after, the man he asked for was before him, booted and
spurred.

“Vitray,” said he, “you will go with all speed to London. You must not
stop an instant on the way. You will deliver this letter to Milady. Here
is an order for two hundred pistoles; call upon my treasurer and get the
money. You shall have as much again if you are back within six days, and
have executed your commission well.”

The messenger, without replying a single word, bowed, took the letter,
with the order for the two hundred pistoles, and retired.

Here is what the letter contained:

MILADY, Be at the first ball at which the Duke of Buckingham shall be
present. He will wear on his doublet twelve diamond studs; get as near
to him as you can, and cut off two.

As soon as these studs shall be in your possession, inform me.




15 MEN OF THE ROBE AND MEN OF THE SWORD


On the day after these events had taken place, Athos not having
reappeared, M. de Treville was informed by d’Artagnan and Porthos of the
circumstance. As to Aramis, he had asked for leave of absence for five
days, and was gone, it was said, to Rouen on family business.

M de Treville was the father of his soldiers. The lowest or the least
known of them, as soon as he assumed the uniform of the company, was as
sure of his aid and support as if he had been his own brother.

He repaired, then, instantly to the office of the LIEUTENANT-CRIMINEL.
The officer who commanded the post of the Red Cross was sent for, and by
successive inquiries they learned that Athos was then lodged in Fort
l’Eveque.

Athos had passed through all the examinations we have seen Bonacieux
undergo.

We were present at the scene in which the two captives were confronted
with each other. Athos, who had till that time said nothing for fear
that d’Artagnan, interrupted in his turn, should not have the time
necessary, from this moment declared that his name was Athos, and not
d’Artagnan. He added that he did not know either M. or Mme. Bonacieux;
that he had never spoken to the one or the other; that he had come, at
about ten o’clock in the evening, to pay a visit to his friend M.
d’Artagnan, but that till that hour he had been at M. de Treville’s,
where he had dined. “Twenty witnesses,” added he, “could attest the
fact”; and he named several distinguished gentlemen, and among them was
M. le Duc de la Tremouille.

The second commissary was as much bewildered as the first had been by
the simple and firm declaration of the Musketeer, upon whom he was
anxious to take the revenge which men of the robe like at all times to
gain over men of the sword; but the name of M. de Treville, and that of
M. de la Tremouille, commanded a little reflection.

Athos was then sent to the cardinal; but unfortunately the cardinal was
at the Louvre with the king.

It was precisely at this moment that M. de Treville, on leaving the
residence of the LIEUTENANT-CRIMINEL and the governor of Fort l’Eveque
without being able to find Athos, arrived at the palace.

As captain of the Musketeers, M. de Treville had the right of entry at
all times.

It is well known how violent the king’s prejudices were against the
queen, and how carefully these prejudices were kept up by the cardinal,
who in affairs of intrigue mistrusted women infinitely more than men.
One of the grand causes of this prejudice was the friendship of Anne of
Austria for Mme. de Chevreuse. These two women gave him more uneasiness
than the war with Spain, the quarrel with England, or the embarrassment
of the finances. In his eyes and to his conviction, Mme. de Chevreuse
not only served the queen in her political intrigues, but, what
tormented him still more, in her amorous intrigues.

At the first word the cardinal spoke of Mme. de Chevreuse--who, though
exiled to Tours and believed to be in that city, had come to Paris,
remained there five days, and outwitted the police--the king flew into a
furious passion. Capricious and unfaithful, the king wished to be called
Louis the Just and Louis the Chaste. Posterity will find a difficulty in
understanding this character, which history explains only by facts and
never by reason.

But when the cardinal added that not only Mme. de Chevreuse had been in
Paris, but still further, that the queen had renewed with her one of
those mysterious correspondences which at that time was named a CABAL;
when he affirmed that he, the cardinal, was about to unravel the most
closely twisted thread of this intrigue; that at the moment of arresting
in the very act, with all the proofs about her, the queen’s emissary to
the exiled duchess, a Musketeer had dared to interrupt the course of
justice violently, by falling sword in hand upon the honest men of the
law, charged with investigating impartially the whole affair in order to
place it before the eyes of the king--Louis XIII could not contain
himself, and he made a step toward the queen’s apartment with that pale
and mute indignation which, when it broke out, led this prince to the
commission of the most pitiless cruelty. And yet, in all this, the
cardinal had not yet said a word about the Duke of Buckingham.

At this instant M. de Treville entered, cool, polite, and in
irreproachable costume.

Informed of what had passed by the presence of the cardinal and the
alteration in the king’s countenance, M. de Treville felt himself
something like Samson before the Philistines.

Louis XIII had already placed his hand on the knob of the door; at the
noise of M. de Treville’s entrance he turned round. “You arrive in good
time, monsieur,” said the king, who, when his passions were raised to a
certain point, could not dissemble; “I have learned some fine things
concerning your Musketeers.”

“And I,” said Treville, coldly, “I have some pretty things to tell your
Majesty concerning these gownsmen.”

“What?” said the king, with hauteur.

“I have the honor to inform your Majesty,” continued M. de Treville, in
the same tone, “that a party of PROCUREURS, commissaries, and men of the
police--very estimable people, but very inveterate, as it appears,
against the uniform--have taken upon themselves to arrest in a house, to
lead away through the open street, and throw into Fort l’Eveque, all
upon an order which they have refused to show me, one of my, or rather
your Musketeers, sire, of irreproachable conduct, of an almost
illustrious reputation, and whom your Majesty knows favorably, Monsieur
Athos.”

“Athos,” said the king, mechanically; “yes, certainly I know that name.”

“Let your Majesty remember,” said Treville, “that Monsieur Athos is the
Musketeer who, in the annoying duel which you are acquainted with, had
the misfortune to wound Monsieur de Cahusac so seriously. A PROPOS,
monseigneur,” continued Treville, addressing the cardinal, “Monsieur de
Cahusac is quite recovered, is he not?”

“Thank you,” said the cardinal, biting his lips with anger.

“Athos, then, went to pay a visit to one of his friends absent at the
time,” continued Treville, “to a young Bearnais, a cadet in his
Majesty’s Guards, the company of Monsieur Dessessart, but scarcely had
he arrived at his friend’s and taken up a book, while waiting his
return, when a mixed crowd of bailiffs and soldiers came and laid siege
to the house, broke open several doors--”

The cardinal made the king a sign, which signified, “That was on account
of the affair about which I spoke to you.”

“We all know that,” interrupted the king; “for all that was done for our
service.”

“Then,” said Treville, “it was also for your Majesty’s service that one
of my Musketeers, who was innocent, has been seized, that he has been
placed between two guards like a malefactor, and that this gallant man,
who has ten times shed his blood in your Majesty’s service and is ready
to shed it again, has been paraded through the midst of an insolent
populace?”

“Bah!” said the king, who began to be shaken, “was it so managed?”

“Monsieur de Treville,” said the cardinal, with the greatest phlegm,
“does not tell your Majesty that this innocent Musketeer, this gallant
man, had only an hour before attacked, sword in hand, four commissaries
of inquiry, who were delegated by myself to examine into an affair of
the highest importance.”

“I defy your Eminence to prove it,” cried Treville, with his Gascon
freedom and military frankness; “for one hour before, Monsieur Athos,
who, I will confide it to your Majesty, is really a man of the highest
quality, did me the honor after having dined with me to be conversing in
the saloon of my hotel, with the Duc de la Tremouille and the Comte de
Chalus, who happened to be there.”

The king looked at the cardinal.

“A written examination attests it,” said the cardinal, replying aloud to
the mute interrogation of his Majesty; “and the ill-treated people have
drawn up the following, which I have the honor to present to your
Majesty.”

“And is the written report of the gownsmen to be placed in comparison
with the word of honor of a swordsman?” replied Treville haughtily.

“Come, come, Treville, hold your tongue,” said the king.

“If his Eminence entertains any suspicion against one of my Musketeers,”
said Treville, “the justice of Monsieur the Cardinal is so well known
that I demand an inquiry.”

“In the house in which the judicial inquiry was made,” continued the
impassive cardinal, “there lodges, I believe, a young Bearnais, a friend
of the Musketeer.”

“Your Eminence means Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“I mean a young man whom you patronize, Monsieur de Treville.”

“Yes, your Eminence, it is the same.”

“Do you not suspect this young man of having given bad counsel?”

“To Athos, to a man double his age?” interrupted Treville. “No,
monseigneur. Besides, d’Artagnan passed the evening with me.”

“Well,” said the cardinal, “everybody seems to have passed the evening
with you.”

“Does your Eminence doubt my word?” said Treville, with a brow flushed
with anger.

“No, God forbid,” said the cardinal; “only, at what hour was he with
you?”

“Oh, as to that I can speak positively, your Eminence; for as he came in
I remarked that it was but half past nine by the clock, although I had
believed it to be later.”

“At what hour did he leave your hotel?”

“At half past ten--an hour after the event.”

“Well,” replied the cardinal, who could not for an instant suspect the
loyalty of Treville, and who felt that the victory was escaping him,
“well, but Athos WAS taken in the house in the Rue des Fossoyeurs.”

“Is one friend forbidden to visit another, or a Musketeer of my company
to fraternize with a Guard of Dessessart’s company?”

“Yes, when the house where he fraternizes is suspected.”

“That house is suspected, Treville,” said the king; “perhaps you did not
know it?”

“Indeed, sire, I did not. The house may be suspected; but I deny that it
is so in the part of it inhabited by Monsieur d’Artagnan, for I can
affirm, sire, if I can believe what he says, that there does not exist a
more devoted servant of your Majesty, or a more profound admirer of
Monsieur the Cardinal.”

“Was it not this d’Artagnan who wounded Jussac one day, in that
unfortunate encounter which took place near the Convent of the
Carmes-Dechausses?” asked the king, looking at the cardinal, who colored
with vexation.

“And the next day, Bernajoux. Yes, sire, yes, it is the same; and your
Majesty has a good memory.”

“Come, how shall we decide?” said the king.

“That concerns your Majesty more than me,” said the cardinal. “I should
affirm the culpability.”

“And I deny it,” said Treville. “But his Majesty has judges, and these
judges will decide.”

“That is best,” said the king. “Send the case before the judges; it is
their business to judge, and they shall judge.”

“Only,” replied Treville, “it is a sad thing that in the unfortunate
times in which we live, the purest life, the most incontestable virtue,
cannot exempt a man from infamy and persecution. The army, I will answer
for it, will be but little pleased at being exposed to rigorous
treatment on account of police affairs.”

The expression was imprudent; but M. de Treville launched it with
knowledge of his cause. He was desirous of an explosion, because in that
case the mine throws forth fire, and fire enlightens.

“Police affairs!” cried the king, taking up Treville’s words, “police
affairs! And what do you know about them, Monsieur? Meddle with your
Musketeers, and do not annoy me in this way. It appears, according to
your account, that if by mischance a Musketeer is arrested, France is in
danger. What a noise about a Musketeer! I would arrest ten of them,
VENTREBLEU, a hundred, even, all the company, and I would not allow a
whisper.”

“From the moment they are suspected by your Majesty,” said Treville,
“the Musketeers are guilty; therefore, you see me prepared to surrender
my sword--for after having accused my soldiers, there can be no doubt
that Monsieur the Cardinal will end by accusing me. It is best to
constitute myself at once a prisoner with Athos, who is already
arrested, and with d’Artagnan, who most probably will be.”

“Gascon-headed man, will you have done?” said the king.

“Sire,” replied Treville, without lowering his voice in the least,
“either order my Musketeer to be restored to me, or let him be tried.”

“He shall be tried,” said the cardinal.

“Well, so much the better; for in that case I shall demand of his
Majesty permission to plead for him.”

The king feared an outbreak.

“If his Eminence,” said he, “did not have personal motives--”

The cardinal saw what the king was about to say and interrupted him:

“Pardon me,” said he; “but the instant your Majesty considers me a
prejudiced judge, I withdraw.”

“Come,” said the king, “will you swear, by my father, that Athos was at
your residence during the event and that he took no part in it?”

“By your glorious father, and by yourself, whom I love and venerate
above all the world, I swear it.”

“Be so kind as to reflect, sire,” said the cardinal. “If we release the
prisoner thus, we shall never know the truth.”

“Athos may always be found,” replied Treville, “ready to answer, when it
shall please the gownsmen to interrogate him. He will not desert,
Monsieur the Cardinal, be assured of that; I will answer for him.”

“No, he will not desert,” said the king; “he can always be found, as
Treville says. Besides,” added he, lowering his voice and looking with a
suppliant air at the cardinal, “let us give them apparent security; that
is policy.”

This policy of Louis XIII made Richelieu smile.

“Order it as you please, sire; you possess the right of pardon.”

“The right of pardoning only applies to the guilty,” said Treville, who
was determined to have the last word, “and my Musketeer is innocent. It
is not mercy, then, that you are about to accord, sire, it is justice.”

“And he is in the Fort l’Eveque?” said the king.

“Yes, sire, in solitary confinement, in a dungeon, like the lowest
criminal.”

“The devil!” murmured the king; “what must be done?”

“Sign an order for his release, and all will be said,” replied the
cardinal. “I believe with your Majesty that Monsieur de Treville’s
guarantee is more than sufficient.”

Treville bowed very respectfully, with a joy that was not unmixed with
fear; he would have preferred an obstinate resistance on the part of the
cardinal to this sudden yielding.

The king signed the order for release, and Treville carried it away
without delay. As he was about to leave the presence, the cardinal gave
him a friendly smile, and said, “A perfect harmony reigns, sire, between
the leaders and the soldiers of your Musketeers, which must be
profitable for the service and honorable to all.”

“He will play me some dog’s trick or other, and that immediately,” said
Treville. “One has never the last word with such a man. But let us be
quick--the king may change his mind in an hour; and at all events it is
more difficult to replace a man in the Fort l’Eveque or the Bastille who
has got out, than to keep a prisoner there who is in.”

M de Treville made his entrance triumphantly into the Fort l’Eveque,
whence he delivered the Musketeer, whose peaceful indifference had not
for a moment abandoned him.

The first time he saw d’Artagnan, “You have come off well,” said he to
him; “there is your Jussac thrust paid for. There still remains that of
Bernajoux, but you must not be too confident.”

As to the rest, M. de Treville had good reason to mistrust the cardinal
and to think that all was not over, for scarcely had the captain of the
Musketeers closed the door after him, than his Eminence said to the
king, “Now that we are at length by ourselves, we will, if your Majesty
pleases, converse seriously. Sire, Buckingham has been in Paris five
days, and only left this morning.”




16 IN WHICH M. SEGUIER, KEEPER OF THE SEALS, LOOKS MORE THAN ONCE FOR
THE BELL


It is impossible to form an idea of the impression these few words made
upon Louis XIII. He grew pale and red alternately; and the cardinal saw
at once that he had recovered by a single blow all the ground he had
lost.

“Buckingham in Paris!” cried he, “and why does he come?”

“To conspire, no doubt, with your enemies, the Huguenots and the
Spaniards.”

“No, PARDIEU, no! To conspire against my honor with Madame de Chevreuse,
Madame de Longueville, and the Condes.”

“Oh, sire, what an idea! The queen is too virtuous; and besides, loves
your Majesty too well.”

“Woman is weak, Monsieur Cardinal,” said the king; “and as to loving me
much, I have my own opinion as to that love.”

“I not the less maintain,” said the cardinal, “that the Duke of
Buckingham came to Paris for a project wholly political.”

“And I am sure that he came for quite another purpose, Monsieur
Cardinal; but if the queen be guilty, let her tremble!”

“Indeed,” said the cardinal, “whatever repugnance I may have to
directing my mind to such a treason, your Majesty compels me to think of
it. Madame de Lannoy, whom, according to your Majesty’s command, I have
frequently interrogated, told me this morning that the night before last
her Majesty sat up very late, that this morning she wept much, and that
she was writing all day.”

“That’s it!” cried the king; “to him, no doubt. Cardinal, I must have
the queen’s papers.”

“But how to take them, sire? It seems to me that it is neither your
Majesty nor myself who can charge himself with such a mission.”

“How did they act with regard to the Marechale d’Ancre?” cried the king,
in the highest state of choler; “first her closets were thoroughly
searched, and then she herself.”

“The Marechale d’Ancre was no more than the Marechale d’Ancre. A
Florentine adventurer, sire, and that was all; while the august spouse
of your Majesty is Anne of Austria, Queen of France--that is to say, one
of the greatest princesses in the world.”

“She is not the less guilty, Monsieur Duke! The more she has forgotten
the high position in which she was placed, the more degrading is her
fall. Besides, I long ago determined to put an end to all these petty
intrigues of policy and love. She has near her a certain Laporte.”

“Who, I believe, is the mainspring of all this, I confess,” said the
cardinal.

“You think then, as I do, that she deceives me?” said the king.

“I believe, and I repeat it to your Majesty, that the queen conspires
against the power of the king, but I have not said against his honor.”

“And I--I tell you against both. I tell you the queen does not love me;
I tell you she loves another; I tell you she loves that infamous
Buckingham! Why did you not have him arrested while in Paris?”

“Arrest the Duke! Arrest the prime minister of King Charles I! Think of
it, sire! What a scandal! And if the suspicions of your Majesty, which I
still continue to doubt, should prove to have any foundation, what a
terrible disclosure, what a fearful scandal!”

“But as he exposed himself like a vagabond or a thief, he should have
been--”

Louis XIII stopped, terrified at what he was about to say, while
Richelieu, stretching out his neck, waited uselessly for the word which
had died on the lips of the king.

“He should have been--?”

“Nothing,” said the king, “nothing. But all the time he was in Paris,
you, of course, did not lose sight of him?”

“No, sire.”

“Where did he lodge?”

“Rue de la Harpe. No. 75.”

“Where is that?”

“By the side of the Luxembourg.”

“And you are certain that the queen and he did not see each other?”

“I believe the queen to have too high a sense of her duty, sire.”

“But they have corresponded; it is to him that the queen has been
writing all the day. Monsieur Duke, I must have those letters!”

“Sire, notwithstanding--”

“Monsieur Duke, at whatever price it may be, I will have them.”

“I would, however, beg your Majesty to observe--”

“Do you, then, also join in betraying me, Monsieur Cardinal, by thus
always opposing my will? Are you also in accord with Spain and England,
with Madame de Chevreuse and the queen?”

“Sire,” replied the cardinal, sighing, “I believed myself secure from
such a suspicion.”

“Monsieur Cardinal, you have heard me; I will have those letters.”

“There is but one way.”

“What is that?”

“That would be to charge Monsieur de Seguier, the keeper of the seals,
with this mission. The matter enters completely into the duties of the
post.”

“Let him be sent for instantly.”

“He is most likely at my hotel. I requested him to call, and when I came
to the Louvre I left orders if he came, to desire him to wait.”

“Let him be sent for instantly.”

“Your Majesty’s orders shall be executed; but--”

“But what?”

“But the queen will perhaps refuse to obey.”

“My orders?”

“Yes, if she is ignorant that these orders come from the king.”

“Well, that she may have no doubt on that head, I will go and inform her
myself.”

“Your Majesty will not forget that I have done everything in my power to
prevent a rupture.”

“Yes, Duke, yes, I know you are very indulgent toward the queen, too
indulgent, perhaps; we shall have occasion, I warn you, at some future
period to speak of that.”

“Whenever it shall please your Majesty; but I shall be always happy and
proud, sire, to sacrifice myself to the harmony which I desire to see
reign between you and the Queen of France.”

“Very well, Cardinal, very well; but, meantime, send for Monsieur the
Keeper of the Seals. I will go to the queen.”

And Louis XIII, opening the door of communication, passed into the
corridor which led from his apartments to those of Anne of Austria.

The queen was in the midst of her women--Mme. de Guitaut, Mme. de Sable,
Mme. de Montbazon, and Mme. de Guemene. In a corner was the Spanish
companion, Donna Estafania, who had followed her from Madrid. Mme.
Guemene was reading aloud, and everybody was listening to her with
attention with the exception of the queen, who had, on the contrary,
desired this reading in order that she might be able, while feigning to
listen, to pursue the thread of her own thoughts.

These thoughts, gilded as they were by a last reflection of love, were
not the less sad. Anne of Austria, deprived of the confidence of her
husband, pursued by the hatred of the cardinal, who could not pardon her
for having repulsed a more tender feeling, having before her eyes the
example of the queen-mother whom that hatred had tormented all her
life--though Marie de Medicis, if the memoirs of the time are to be
believed, had begun by according to the cardinal that sentiment which
Anne of Austria always refused him--Anne of Austria had seen her most
devoted servants fall around her, her most intimate confidants, her
dearest favorites. Like those unfortunate persons endowed with a fatal
gift, she brought misfortune upon everything she touched. Her friendship
was a fatal sign which called down persecution. Mme. de Chevreuse and
Mme. de Bernet were exiled, and Laporte did not conceal from his
mistress that he expected to be arrested every instant.

It was at the moment when she was plunged in the deepest and darkest of
these reflections that the door of the chamber opened, and the king
entered.

The reader hushed herself instantly. All the ladies rose, and there was
a profound silence. As to the king, he made no demonstration of
politeness, only stopping before the queen. “Madame,” said he, “you are
about to receive a visit from the chancellor, who will communicate
certain matters to you with which I have charged him.”

The unfortunate queen, who was constantly threatened with divorce,
exile, and trial even, turned pale under her rouge, and could not
refrain from saying, “But why this visit, sire? What can the chancellor
have to say to me that your Majesty could not say yourself?”

The king turned upon his heel without reply, and almost at the same
instant the captain of the Guards, M. de Guitant, announced the visit of
the chancellor.

When the chancellor appeared, the king had already gone out by another
door.

The chancellor entered, half smiling, half blushing. As we shall
probably meet with him again in the course of our history, it may be
well for our readers to be made at once acquainted with him.

This chancellor was a pleasant man. He was Des Roches le Masle, canon of
Notre Dame, who had formerly been valet of a bishop, who introduced him
to his Eminence as a perfectly devout man. The cardinal trusted him, and
therein found his advantage.

There are many stories related of him, and among them this. After a wild
youth, he had retired into a convent, there to expiate, at least for
some time, the follies of adolescence. On entering this holy place, the
poor penitent was unable to shut the door so close as to prevent the
passions he fled from entering with him. He was incessantly attacked by
them, and the superior, to whom he had confided this misfortune, wishing
as much as in him lay to free him from them, had advised him, in order
to conjure away the tempting demon, to have recourse to the bell rope,
and ring with all his might. At the denunciating sound, the monks would
be rendered aware that temptation was besieging a brother, and all the
community would go to prayers.

This advice appeared good to the future chancellor. He conjured the evil
spirit with abundance of prayers offered up by the monks. But the devil
does not suffer himself to be easily dispossessed from a place in which
he has fixed his garrison. In proportion as they redoubled the exorcisms
he redoubled the temptations; so that day and night the bell was ringing
full swing, announcing the extreme desire for mortification which the
penitent experienced.

The monks had no longer an instant of repose. By day they did nothing
but ascend and descend the steps which led to the chapel; at night, in
addition to complines and matins, they were further obliged to leap
twenty times out of their beds and prostrate themselves on the floor of
their cells.

It is not known whether it was the devil who gave way, or the monks who
grew tired; but within three months the penitent reappeared in the world
with the reputation of being the most terrible POSSESSED that ever
existed.

On leaving the convent he entered into the magistracy, became president
on the place of his uncle, embraced the cardinal’s party, which did not
prove want of sagacity, became chancellor, served his Eminence with zeal
in his hatred against the queen-mother and his vengeance against Anne of
Austria, stimulated the judges in the affair of Calais, encouraged the
attempts of M. de Laffemas, chief gamekeeper of France; then, at length,
invested with the entire confidence of the cardinal--a confidence which
he had so well earned--he received the singular commission for the
execution of which he presented himself in the queen’s apartments.

The queen was still standing when he entered; but scarcely had she
perceived him then she reseated herself in her armchair, and made a sign
to her women to resume their cushions and stools, and with an air of
supreme hauteur, said, “What do you desire, monsieur, and with what
object do you present yourself here?”

“To make, madame, in the name of the king, and without prejudice to the
respect which I have the honor to owe to your Majesty a close
examination into all your papers.”

“How, monsieur, an investigation of my papers--mine! Truly, this is an
indignity!”

“Be kind enough to pardon me, madame; but in this circumstance I am but
the instrument which the king employs. Has not his Majesty just left
you, and has he not himself asked you to prepare for this visit?”

“Search, then, monsieur! I am a criminal, as it appears. Estafania, give
up the keys of my drawers and my desks.”

For form’s sake the chancellor paid a visit to the pieces of furniture
named; but he well knew that it was not in a piece of furniture that the
queen would place the important letter she had written that day.

When the chancellor had opened and shut twenty times the drawers of the
secretaries, it became necessary, whatever hesitation he might
experience--it became necessary, I say, to come to the conclusion of the
affair; that is to say, to search the queen herself. The chancellor
advanced, therefore, toward Anne of Austria, and said with a very
perplexed and embarrassed air, “And now it remains for me to make the
principal examination.”

“What is that?” asked the queen, who did not understand, or rather was
not willing to understand.

“His majesty is certain that a letter has been written by you during the
day; he knows that it has not yet been sent to its address. This letter
is not in your table nor in your secretary; and yet this letter must be
somewhere.”

“Would you dare to lift your hand to your queen?” said Anne of Austria,
drawing herself up to her full height, and fixing her eyes upon the
chancellor with an expression almost threatening.

“I am a faithful subject of the king, madame, and all that his Majesty
commands I shall do.”

“Well, it is true!” said Anne of Austria; “and the spies of the cardinal
have served him faithfully. I have written a letter today; that letter
is not yet gone. The letter is here.” And the queen laid her beautiful
hand on her bosom.

“Then give me that letter, madame,” said the chancellor.

“I will give it to none but the king, monsieur,” said Anne.

“If the king had desired that the letter should be given to him, madame,
he would have demanded it of you himself. But I repeat to you, I am
charged with reclaiming it; and if you do not give it up--”

“Well?”

“He has, then, charged me to take it from you.”

“How! What do you say?”

“That my orders go far, madame; and that I am authorized to seek for the
suspected paper, even on the person of your Majesty.”

“What horror!” cried the queen.

“Be kind enough, then, madame, to act more compliantly.”

“The conduct is infamously violent! Do you know that, monsieur?”

“The king commands it, madame; excuse me.”

“I will not suffer it! No, no, I would rather die!” cried the queen, in
whom the imperious blood of Spain and Austria began to rise.

The chancellor made a profound reverence. Then, with the intention quite
patent of not drawing back a foot from the accomplishment of the
commission with which he was charged, and as the attendant of an
executioner might have done in the chamber of torture, he approached
Anne of Austria, from whose eyes at the same instant sprang tears of
rage.
